# Week 1
## Integrals and Cauchy's Theorem


### 5

Show that there is no sequence of polynomials converging uniformly to $f(z) = 1/z$ on $S^1$.

Solution

- By Cauchy's integral formula, $\int_{S^1} f = 2\pi i$
- If $p_j$ is any polynomial, then $p_j$ is holomorphic in $\DD$, so $\int_{S^1} p_j = 0$.
- Contradiction: compact sets in $\CC$ are bounded, so 
  \begin{align*}
  \abs{\int f - \int p_j} \leq \int \abs{p_j - f} \leq \int \norm{p_j - f}_\infty  = \norm{p_j - f}_\infty \int_{S^1} 1 \,dz = \norm{p_j-f}_\infty \cdot 2\pi \to 0
  \end{align*}
  which forces $\int f = \int p_j = 0$.

### 9

### 10

Suppose $f:\CC\to\CC$ is entire and bounded, and use Cauchy's theorem to prove that $f' \equiv 0$ and thus $f$ is constant.

Solution

- Suffices to prove $f' = 0$ because $\CC$ is connected (see Stein Ch 1, 3.4)
  - Idea: Fix $w_0$, show $f(w) = f(w_0)$ for any $w\neq w_0$
  - Connected = Path connected in $\CC$, so take $\gamma$ joining $w$ to $w_0$.
  - $f$ is a primitive for $f'$, and $\int_\gamma f' = f(w) - f(w_0)$, but $f'=0$.
- Fix $z_0\in \CC$, let $B$ be the bound for $f$, so $\abs{f(z)} \leq B$ for all $z$.
- Apply Cauchy inequalities: if $f$ is holomorphic on $U\supset \bar D_R(z_0)$ then setting $\norm{f}_C \definedas \sup_{z\in C} \abs{f(z)}$,
  \begin{align*}
  \abs{f^{(n)} (z_0)} \leq {n! \norm{f}_C \over R^n}
  .\end{align*}
  - Yields $\abs{ f'(z_0) } \leq B/R$
- Take $R\to \infty$, QED.

## Liouville. The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, Power Series

### 1

Suppose $f$ is analytic on $\Omega \supseteq \DD$ whose power series $\sum a_n z^n$ has radius of convergence 1.

a. Give an example of an $f$ which converges at every point on $S^1$.
b. Give an example of an $f$ which is analytic at $z=1$ but $\sum a_n$ diverges.
c. Prove that $f$ can not be analytic at every point of $S^1$.


Solution:

a. Take $\sum {z^n \over n^2}$; then $\abs{z}\leq 1 \implies \abs{z^n\over n^2} \leq {1\over n^2}$ which is summable, so the series converges for $\abs{z}\leq 1$.

b. Take $\sum {z^n \over n}$; then $z=1$ yields the harmonic series, which diverges.
  
    - For $z\in S^1\setminus\theset{1}$, we have $z = e^{2\pi it}$ for $0<t<2\pi$. 
    - So fix $t$.
    
    - Toward applying the Dirichlet test, set $a_n = 1/n, b_n = z^n$.
    
    - Then for all $N$,
    \begin{align*}
    \abs{\sum_{n=1}^N b_n}
    = \abs{\sum_{n=1}^N b_n}
    = \abs{\sum_{n=1}^N z^n}
    = \abs{  {z-z^{N+1} \over \abs{1 - z}} } 
    \leq {2 \over 1-z} < \infty
    .\end{align*}
    
    - Thus $\sum a_n b_n < \infty$ and $\sum z^n/n$ converges.

c. ?


### 5

Prove the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra: every non-constant polynomial $p(z) = a_nz^n + \cdots + a_0 \in \CC[x]$ has a root in $\CC$.

Solution:

- Strategy: By contradiction with Liouville's Theorem
- Suppose $p$ is non-constant and has no roots.
- Claim: $1/p(z)$ is a bounded holomorphic function on $\CC$.
  - Holomorphic: clear? Since $p$ has no roots.
  - Bounded: for $z\neq 0$, write
    \begin{align*}
    \frac{P(z)}{z^{n}}=a_{n}+\left(\frac{a_{n-1}}{z}+\cdots+\frac{a_{0}}{z^{n}}\right)
    .\end{align*}

  - The term in parentheses goes to 0 as $\abs{z}\to \infty$
  - Thus there exists an $R>0$ such that
    \begin{align*}
    \abs{z} > R \implies \abs{P(z) \over z^n} \geq c \definedas {\abs{a_n} \over 2}
    .\end{align*}

  - So $p$ is bounded below when $\abs{z} > R$
  - Since $p$ is continuous and has no roots in $\abs{z} \leq R$, it is bounded below when $\abs{z} \leq R$.
  - Thus $p$ is bounded below on $\CC$ and thus $1/p$ is bounded above on $\CC$.
- By Liouville's theorem, $1/p$ is constant and thus $p$ is constant, a contradiction.


### 6

Find all entire functions $f$ which satisfy the following inequality, and prove the list is complete:
\begin{align*}
\abs{f(z)} \geq z
.\end{align*}

Solution:

- Suppose $f$ is entire and define $g(z) \definedas {z \over f(z)}$.
- By the inequality, $\abs{g(z)} \leq 1$, so $g$ is bounded.
- $g$ potentially has singularities at the zeros $Z_f \definedas f\inv(0)$, but since $f$ is entire, $g$ is holomorphic on $\CC\setminus Z_f$.
- Claim: $Z_f \subset \CC$ is closed and discrete
  - ???
- Thus the singularities $Z_f$ are isolated
- By Riemann's removable singularity theorem, the singularities $Z_f$ are removable and $g$ has an extension to an entire function $\tilde g$.
- By continuity, we have $\abs{\tilde g(z)} \leq 1$ on all of $\CC$
- By Liouville, $\tilde g$ is constant, so $\tilde g(z) = c_0$ with $\abs {c_0} \leq 1$
- Thus $f(z) = c_o\inv z$

Thus all such functions are of the form $f(z) = cz$ for some $c\neq 0\in \CC$.
