# Definitions: Point-Set Topology

## Basics


:::{.definition title="Topology"}
Closed under arbitrary unions and finite intersections.
:::

:::{.definition title="Neighborhood"}
A neighborhood of a point $x$ is *any* open set containing $x$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Limit Point"}
For $A\subset X$, $x$ is a limit point of $A$ if every punctured neighborhood $P_{x}$ of $x$ satisfies $P_{x} \intersect A \neq \emptyset$, i.e. every neighborhood of $x$ intersects $A$ in some point other than $x$ itself.
    
Equivalently, $x$ is a limit point of $A$ iff $x\in \cl_{X}(A\setminus\theset{x})$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Closed"}
\envlist

- A set is closed if and only if its complement is open.
- A set is closed iff it contains all of its limit points.
- A closet set in a subspace: $Y\subset X \implies \cl_{Y}(A) \da \cl_{X}(A)\intersect Y$.

:::


:::{.definition title="Basis"}
For $X$ a space and $\mcb$ a collection of subsets, $\mcb$ is a *basis* for $(X, \tau_{X})$ iff every open $U\in \tau_{X}$ is a union of elements in $\mcb$.
:::


:::{.definition title="Topology generated by a basis"}
For $X$ an arbitrary set, a collection of subsets $\mcb$ is a *basis for $X$* iff $\mcb$ is closed under intersections, and every intersection of basis elements contains another basis element.
The set of unions of elements in $B$ is a topology and is denoted *the topology generated by $\mcb$*.
:::


:::{.definition title="Neighborhood Basis"}
If $p\in X$, a *neighborhood basis* at $p$ is a collection $\mcb_{p}$ of neighborhoods of $p$ such that if $N_{p}$ is a neighborhood of $p$, then $N_{p} \supseteq B$ for at least one $B\in \mcb_{p}$.
:::


:::{.definition title="Cover"}
A collection of subsets $\theset{U_\alpha}$ of $X$ is said to *cover $X$* iff $X = \union_{\alpha} U_\alpha$.
If $A\subseteq X$ is a subspace, then this collection *covers $A$* iff $A\subseteq \union_{\alpha} U_\alpha$.
:::


:::{.definition title="Refinement"}
A cover $\mcv \covers X$ is a *refinement* of $\mcu \covers X$ iff for each $V\in \mcv$ there exists a $U\in\mcu$ such that $V\subseteq U$.
:::


## Analysis 


:::{.definition title="Dense"}
A subset $Q\subset X$ is dense iff $y\in N_{y} \subset X \implies N_{y} \intersect Q \neq \emptyset$ iff $\bar Q = X$.
:::


:::{.definition title="Bounded"}
A set $S$ in a metric space $(X, d)$ is *bounded* iff there exists an $m\in \RR$ such that $d(x, y) < m$ for every $x, y\in S$.
:::


:::{.definition title="Uniform Continuity"}
For $f: (X, d_{x}) \to (Y, d_{Y})$ metric spaces,
\[
\forall \eps > 0, ~\exists \delta > 0 \text{ such that } \quad d_{X}(x_{1}, x_{2}) < \delta \implies d_{Y}(f(x_{1}), f(x_{2})) < \eps
.\] 
:::


:::{.definition title="Lebesgue Number"}
For $(X, d)$ a compact metric space and $\theset{U_\alpha}\covers X$, there exist $\delta_{L} > 0$ such that 
\[
A\subset X, ~ \diam(A) < \delta_{L} \implies A\subseteq U_\alpha \text{ for some } \alpha
.\]
:::




## Connectedness


:::{.definition title="Connected"}
There does not exist a disconnecting set $X = A\disjoint B$ such that $\emptyset \neq A, B \subsetneq$, i.e. $X$ is the union of two proper disjoint nonempty sets.
Additional condition for a subspace $Y\subset X$: $\cl_{Y}(A) \intersect V = A \intersect \cl_{Y}(B) = \emptyset$.
  
Equivalently, $X$ contains no proper nonempty clopen sets.
:::


:::{.definition title="Locally Connected"}
A space is *locally connected* at a point $x$ iff $\forall N_{x} \ni x$, there exists a $U\subset N_{x}$ containing $x$ that is connected.
:::


:::{.definition title="Locally Path-Connected"}
A space is *locally path-connected* if it admits a basis of path-connected open subsets.
:::


:::{.definition title="Components"}
Set $x\sim y$ iff there exists a connected set $U\ni x, y$ and take equivalence classes.
:::



:::{.definition title="Path Components"}
Set $x\sim y$ iff there exists a path-connected set $U\ni x, y$ and take equivalence classes.
:::



## Compactness


:::{.definition title="Compact"}
A topological space $(X, \tau)$ is **compact** if every open cover has a *finite* subcover.

That is, if $\theset{U_{j} \suchthat j\in J} \subset \tau$ is a collection of open sets such that $X = \union_{j\in J} U_{j}$, then there exists a *finite* subset $J' \subset J$ such that $X \subseteq \union_{j\in J'} U_{j}$.
:::


:::{.definition title="Locally Compact"}
A space $X$ is *locally compact* iff every $x\in X$ has a neighborhood contained in a compact subset of $X$.
:::


:::{.definition title="Paracompact"}
A topological space $X$ is *paracompact* iff every open cover of $X$ admits an open locally finite refinement.
:::


:::{.definition title="Precompact"}
A subset $A\subseteq X$ is *precompact* iff $\cl_{X}(A)$ is compact.
:::


## Separability


:::{.definition title="Locally Finite"}
A collection of subsets $\mcs$ of $X$ is *locally finite* iff each point of $M$ has a neighborhood that intersects at most finitely many elements of $\mcs$.
:::


:::{.definition title="Separable "}
A space $X$ is *separable* iff $X$ contains a countable dense subset.
:::




Definition (Hausdorff)
: A topo.ogical space $X$ is *Hausdorff* iff for every $p\neq q \in X$ there exist disjoint open sets $U\ni p$ and $V\ni q$. 

Definition (First Countable)
: A space is *first-countable* iff every point admits a countable neighborhood basis.

Definition (Second Countable)
: A space is *second-countable* iff it admits a countable basis.

Definition (Regular)
: \todo[inline]{Todo}

Definition (Normal)
: \todo[inline]{Todo}

## Misc

Definition (Normal)
:   \todo[inline]{Todo}



## Todo

- Saturated
- Quotient Map
- The subspace topology
- The quotient topology
- The product topology
- Topological Embedding
- Continuous map
- Open and Closed maps
