# Definitions

- Topology: 
    Closed under arbitrary unions and finite intersections.

Definition (Basis)
: For $X$ a space and $\mcb$ a collection of subsets, $\mcb$ is a *basis* for $(X, \tau_X)$ iff every open $U\in \tau_X$ is a union of elements in $\mcb$.

Definition (Topology Generated by a Basis)
:   For $X$ an arbitrary set, a collection of subsets $\mcb$ is a *basis for $X$* iff $\mcb$ is closed under intersections, and every intersection of basis elements contains another basis element.
    The set of unions of elements in $B$ is a topology and is denoted *the topology generated by $\mcb$*.

- Dense:
    A subset $Q\subset X$ is dense iff $y\in N_y \subset X \implies N_y \intersect Q \neq \emptyset$ iff $\bar Q = X$.

- Neighborhood: 
    A neighborhood of a point $x$ is any open set containing $x$.

- Hausdorff

Definition (Neighborhood Basis)
: If $p\in X$, a *neighborhood basis* at $p$ is a collection $\mcb_p$ of neighborhoods of $p$ such that every neighborhood of $p$ contains at least one $B\in \mcb_p$.

Definition (First Countable)
: A space is *first-countable* iff every point admits a countable neighborhood basis.

Definition (Second Countable)
: A space is *second-countable* iff it admits a countable basis.

- Closed (several characterizations)
 - Closure in a subspace: $Y\subset X \implies \cl_Y(A) \definedas \cl_X(A)\intersect Y$.

- Bounded

- Compact:
    A topological space $(X, \tau)$ is **compact** if every open cover has a *finite* subcover.
    
    That is, if $\theset{U_j \suchthat j\in J} \subset \tau$ is a collection of open sets such that $X \subseteq \union_{j\in J} U_j$, then there exists a *finite* subset $J' \subset J$ such that $X \subseteq \union_{j\in J'} U_j$.

Definition (Cover)
: A collection of subsets $\theset{U_\alpha}$ of $X$ is said to *cover $X$* iff $X = \union_{\alpha} U_\alpha$.
  If $A\subseteq X$ is a subspace, then this collection *covers $A$* iff $A\subseteq \union_{\alpha} U_\alpha$

- Locally compact
  For every $x\in X$, there exists a $K_x \ni x$ such that $K_x$ is compact.

- Connected: 
  There does not exist a disconnecting set $X = A\disjoint B$ such that $\emptyset \neq A, B \subsetneq$, i.e. $X$ is the union of two proper disjoint nonempty sets.
  
  Equivalently, $X$ contains no proper nonempty clopen sets.
  - Additional condition for a subspace $Y\subset X$: $\cl_Y(A) \intersect V = A \intersect \cl_Y(B) = \emptyset$.

- Locally connected:
  A space is locally connected at a point $x$ iff $\forall N_x \ni x$, there exists a $U\subset N_x$ containing $x$ that is connected.

Definition (Locally Path-Connected)
: A space is *locally path-connected* if it admits a basis of path-connected open subsets.
  
- Retract: 
    A subspace $A \subset X$ is a *retract* of $X$ iff there exists a continuous map $f: X\to A$ such that $f\mid_{A} = \id_A$. Equivalently it is a *left* inverse to the inclusion.

- Uniform Continuity: 
    For $f: (X, d_x) \to (Y, d_Y)$ metric spaces,
    \begin{align*}
    \forall \eps > 0, ~\exists \delta > 0 \text{ such that } \quad d_X(x_1, x_2) < \delta \implies d_Y(f(x_1), f(x_2)) < \eps
    .\end{align*} 

- Lebesgue number: 
    For $(X, d)$ a compact metric space and $\theset{U_\alpha}\covers X$, there exist $\delta_L > 0$ such that 
    \begin{align*}
    A\subset X, ~ \diam(A) < \delta_L \implies A\subseteq U_\alpha \text{ for some } \alpha
    .\end{align*}

- Paracompact

- Components: 
    Set $x\sim y$ iff there exists a connected set $U\ni x, y$ and take equivalence classes.

- Path Components:
    Set $x\sim y$ iff there exists a path-connected set $U\ni x, y$ and take equivalence classes.

Definition (Precompact)
: A subset $A\subseteq X$ is *precompact* iff $\cl_X(A)$ is compact.

Definition (Separable)
: Contains a countable dense subset.

- Limit Point:
    For $A\subset X$, $x$ is a limit point of $A$ if every punctured neighborhood $P_x$ of $x$ satisfies $P_x \intersect A \neq \emptyset$, i.e. every neighborhood of $x$ intersects $A$ in some point other than $x$ itself.
    
    Equivalently, $x$ is a limit point of $A$ iff $x\in \cl_X(A\setminus\theset{x})$.

