# Fall 2014

## 1. Let $X = \RR^3 - \Delta^{(1)}$, the complement of the skeleton of regular tetrahedron, and compute $\pi_1(X)$ and $H_*(X)$.

Lay the graph out flat in the plane, then take a maximal tree - these leaves 3 edges, and so $\pi_1(X) = \ZZ^{\ast 3}$.

Moreover $X \homotopic S^1\vee S^1 \vee S^1$ which has only a 1-skeleton, thus $H_*(X) = [\ZZ, \ZZ^3, 0\rightarrow]$.

## 2. Let $X = S^1 \cross B^2 - L$ where $L$ is two linked solid torii inside a larger solid torus. Compute $H_*(X)$.
?

## 3. Let $L$ be a 3-manifold with homology $[\ZZ, \ZZ_3, 0, \ZZ, \ldots]$ and let $X = L \cross \Sigma L$. Compute $H_*(X), H^*(X)$.

Useful facts:

- $H_{k}(X\times Y) \cong \bigoplus _{{i+j=k}}H_{i}(X)\otimes H_{j}(Y) \bigoplus_{i+j=k-1}\tor(H_i(X), H_j(Y))$
- $\tilde H_i(\Sigma X) = \tilde H_{i-1}(X)$

We will use the fact that $H_*(\Sigma L) = [\ZZ, \ZZ, \ZZ_3, 0, \ZZ]$.

Represent $H_*(L)$ by $p(x, y) = 1 + yx + x^3$ and $H_*(\Sigma L)$ by $q(x,y) = 1 + x + yx^2 + x^4$, we can extract the free part of $H_*(X)$ by multiplying

$$p(x,y)q(x,y) = 1 + (1+y)x + 2yx^2 + (y^2+1)x^3 + 2x^4 + 2yx^5 + x^7$$

where multiplication corresponds to the tensor product, addition to the direct sum/product.

So the free portion is
$$H_*(X) = [\ZZ, \ZZ\oplus \ZZ_3, \ZZ_3\tensor \ZZ_3, \ZZ \oplus \ZZ_3\tensor \ZZ_3, \ZZ^2, \ZZ_3^2, 0, \ZZ] \\
=[\ZZ, \ZZ\oplus \ZZ_3, \ZZ_3, \ZZ \oplus \ZZ_3, \ZZ^2, \ZZ_3^2, 0, \ZZ]
$$

We can add in the correction from torsion by noting that only terms of the form $\tor(\ZZ_3, \ZZ_3) = \ZZ_3$ survive. These come from the terms $i=1, j=2$, so $i+j=k-1 \implies k = 1+2+1 = 4$ and there is thus an additional torsion term appearing in dimension 4. So we have

$$H_*(X) = [\ZZ, \ZZ\times \ZZ_3, \ZZ_3, \ZZ \times \ZZ_3, \ZZ^2 \times \ZZ_3, \ZZ_3^2, 0, \ZZ] \\ = [\ZZ, \ZZ, 0,\ZZ,\ZZ^2,0,0,\ZZ] \times [0,\ZZ_3,\ZZ_3,\ZZ_3,\ZZ_3,\ZZ_3^2,0,0]$$

and $$H^*(X)= [\ZZ, \ZZ, 0,\ZZ,\ZZ^2,0,0,\ZZ] \times [0, 0,\ZZ_3,\ZZ_3,\ZZ_3,\ZZ_3,\ZZ_3^2,0] \\ = [\ZZ, \ZZ, \ZZ_3,\ZZ\times \ZZ_3,\ZZ^2\times \ZZ_3,\ZZ_3,\ZZ_3^2,\ZZ].$$

$\qed$

## 4. Let $M$ be a closed, connected, oriented 4-manifold such that $H_2(M; \ZZ)$ has rank 1. Show that there is not a free $\ZZ_2$ action on $M$.

Useful facts:

- $X \surjects_{\times p} Y$ induces $\chi(X) = p\chi(Y)$
- Moral: always try a simple Euler characteristic argument first!

We know that $H_*(M) = [\ZZ, A, \ZZ \times G, A, \ZZ]$ for some group $A$ and some torsion group $G$. Letting $n=\mathrm{rank}(A)$ and taking the Euler characteristic, we have $\chi(M) = (1)1 + (-1)n + (1)1 + (-1)n + (1)1 = 3-2n$. Note that this is odd for any $n$.

However, a free action of $\ZZ_2 \actson M$ would produce a double covering $M \surjects_{\times 2} M/\ZZ_2$, and multiplicativity of Euler characteristics would force $\chi(M) = 2 \chi(M/\ZZ_2)$ and thus $3-2n = 2k$ for some integer $k$. This would require $3-2n$ to be even, so we have a contradiction. $\qed$

## 5. Let $X$ be $T^2$ with a 2-cell attached to the interior along a longitude. Compute $\pi_2(X)$.

Useful facts:

- $T^2 = e^0 + e^1_1 + e^1_2 + e^2$ as a CW complex.
- $S^2/(x_0 \sim x_1) \homotopic S^2 \wedge S^1$ when $x_0, x_1$ are two distinct points. (Picture: sphere with a string handle connecting north/south poles.)
- $\pi_{\geq 2}(\tilde X) \cong \pi_{\geq 2}(X)$ for $\tilde X \surjects X$ the universal cover.

Write $T^2 = e^0 + e^1_1 + e^1_2 + e^2$, where the first and second 1-cells denote the longitude and meridian respectively. By symmetry, we could have equivalently attached a disk to the meridian instead of the longitude, filling the center hole in the torus. Contract this disk to a point, then pull it vertically in both directions to obtain $S^2$ with two points identified, which is homotopy-equivalent to $S^2 \vee S_1$.

Take the universal cover, which is $\RR^1 \union_{\ZZ} S^2$ and has the same $\pi_2$. This is homotopy-equivalent to $\bigvee_{i\in \ZZ}S^2$ and so $\pi_2(X) = \prod_{i\in \ZZ} \ZZ$ generated by each distinct copy of $S^2$. (Alternatively written as $\ZZ[t, t^{-1}]$).
