# Spring 2013

## 1
Let $R$ be a commutative ring.

a. Define a *maximal ideal* and prove that $R$ has a maximal ideal.

b. Show than an element $r\in R$ is not invertible $\iff r$ is contained in a maximal ideal.

c. Let $M$ be an $R\dash$module, and recall that for $0\neq \mu \in M$, the *annihilator* of $\mu$ is the set
  \begin{align*}
  \ann(\mu) = \theset{r\in R \suchthat r\mu = 0}
  .\end{align*}
  Suppose that $I$ is an ideal in $R$ which is maximal with respect to the property that there exists an element $\mu \in M$ such that $I = \ann(\mu)$ for some $\mu \in M$.
  In other words, $I = \ann(\mu)$ but there does not exist $\nu\in M$ with $J = \ann(\nu) \subsetneq R$ such that $I\subsetneq J$.

  Prove that $I$ is a prime ideal.


## 2

a. Define a *Euclidean domain*.

b. Define a *unique factorization domain*.

c. Is a Euclidean domain an UFD? 
  Give either a proof or a counterexample with justification.

d. Is a UFD a Euclidean domain?
  Give either a proof or a counterexample with justification.
  


## 3
Let $P$ be a finite $p\dash$group.
Prove that every nontrivial normal subgroup of $P$ intersects the center of $P$ nontrivially.


## 4
Define a *simple group*.
Prove that a group of order 56 can not be simple.


## 5
Let $T: V\to V$ be a linear map from a 5-dimensional $\CC\dash$vector space to itself and suppose $f(T) = 0$ where $f(x) = x^2 + 2x + 1$.

a. Show that there does not exist any vector $v\in V$ such that $Tv = v$, but there *does* exist a vector $w\in V$ such that $T^2 w= w$.

b. Give all of the possible Jordan canonical forms of $T$.


## 6
Let $V$ be a finite dimensional vector space over a field $F$ and let $T: V\to V$ be a linear operator with characteristic polynomial $f(x) \in F[x]$.

a. Show that $f(x)$ is irreducible in $F[x] \iff$ there are no proper nonzero subspace $W< V$ with $T(W) \subseteq W$.

b. If $f(x)$ is irreducible in $F[x]$ and the characteristic of $F$ is 0, show that $T$ is diagonalizable when we extend the field to its algebraic closure.


## 7
Let $f(x) = g(x) h(x) \in \QQ[x]$ and $E,B,C/\QQ$ be the splitting fields of $f,g,h$ respectively.

a. Prove that $\gal(E/B)$ and $\gal(E/C)$ are normal subgroups of $\gal(E/\QQ)$.

b. Prove that $\gal(E/B) \intersect \gal(E/C) = \theset{1}$.

c. If $B\intersect C = \QQ$, show that $\gal(E/B) \gal(E/C) = \gal(E/\QQ)$.

d. Under the hypothesis of (c), show that $\gal(E/\QQ) \cong \gal(E/B) \times \gal(E/C)$.

e. Use (d) to describe $\gal(\QQ[\alpha]/\QQ)$ where $\alpha = \sqrt 2 + \sqrt 3$.


## 8
Let $F$ be the field with 2 elements and $K$ a splitting field of $f(x) = x^6 + x^3 + 1$ over $F$.
You may assume that $f$ is irreducible over $F$.

a. Show that if $r$ is a root of $f$ in $K$, then $r^9 = 1$ but $r^3\neq 1$.

b. Find $\gal(K/F)$ and express each intermediate field between $F$ and $K$ as $F(\beta)$ for an appropriate $\beta \in K$.


