# Fall 2012 

## 1
Let $G$ be a finite group and $X$ a set on which $G$ acts.

a. Let $x\in X$ and $G_x \definedas \theset{g\in G \suchthat g\cdot x = x}$. 
  Show that $G_x$ is a subgroup of $G$.

b. Let $x\in X$ and $G\cdot x \definedas \theset{g\cdot x \suchthat g\in G}$.
  Prove that there is a bijection between elements in $G\cdot x$ and the left cosets of $G_x$ in $G$.


## 2
Let $G$ be a group of order 30.

a. Show that $G$ contains normal subgroups of orders 3, 5, and 15.

b. Give all possible presentations and relations for $G$.

c. Determine how many groups of order 30 there are up to isomorphism.


## 3
Let $f(x) \in \QQ[x]$ be an irreducible polynomial of degree 5.
Assume that $f$ has all be two roots in $\RR$.
Compute the Galois group of $f(x)$ over $\QQ$ and justify your answer.


## 4
Let $f(x) \in \QQ[x]$ be a polynomial and $K$ be a splitting field of $f$ over $\QQ$.
Assume that $[K:\QQ] = 1225$ and show that $f(x)$ is solvable by radicals.


## 5
Let $U$ be an infinite-dimensional vector space over a field $k$, $f: U\to U$ a linear map, and $\theset{u_1, \cdots, u_m} \subset U$ vectors such that $U$ is generated by $\theset{u_1, \cdots, u_m, f^d(u_1), \cdots, f^d(u_m)}$ for some $d\in \NN$.

Prove that $U$ can be written as a direct sum $U \cong V\oplus W$ such that 

1. $V$ has a basis consisting of some vector $v_1, \cdots v_n, f^d(v_1), \cdots, f^d(v_n)$ for some $d\in \NN$, and
2. $W$ is finite-dimensional.

Moreover, prove that for any other decomposition $U \cong V' \oplus W'$, one has $W' \cong W$.


## 6
Let $R$ be a ring and $M$ an $R\dash$module.
Recall that $M$ is *Noetherian* iff any strictly increasing chain of submodule $M_1 \subsetneq M_2 \subsetneq \cdots$ is finite.
Call a proper submodule $M' \subsetneq M$ *intersection-decomposable* if it can not be written as the intersection of two proper submodules $M' = M_1\intersect M_2$ with $M_i \subsetneq M$.

Prove that for every Noetherian module $M$, any proper submodule $N\subsetneq M$ can be written as a finite intersection $N = N_1 \intersect \cdots \intersect N_k$ of intersection-indecomposable modules.

## 7
Let $k$ be a field of characteristic zero and $A, B \in M_n(k)$ be two square $n\times n$ matrices over $k$ such that $AB - BA = A$.
Prove that $\det A = 0$.

Moreover, when the characteristic of $k$ is 2, find a counterexample to this statement.


## 8
Prove that any nondegenerate matrix $X\in M_n(\RR)$ can be written as $X = UT$ where $U$ is orthogonal and $T$ is upper triangular.


