# Spring 2014

## 1
Let $p, q$ be distinct primes.

a. Let $\bar q \in \ZZ_p$ be the class of $q\mod p$ and let $k$ denote the order of $\bar q$ as an element of $\ZZ_p\units$.
  Prove that no group of order $pq^k$ is simple.

b. Let $G$ be a group of order $pq$, and prove that $G$ is not simple.


## 2
Let $G$ be a group of order 30.

a. Show that $G$ has a subgroup of order 15.

b. Show that every group of order 15 is cyclic.

c. Show that $G$ is isomorphic to some semidirect product $\ZZ_{15} \semidirect \ZZ_2$.

d. Exhibit three nonisomorphic groups of order 30 and prove that they are not isomorphic.
  You are not required to use your answer to (c).


## 3

a. Define *prime ideal*, give an example of a nontrivial ideal in the ring $\ZZ$ that is not prime, and prove that it is not prime.

b. Define *maximal ideal*, give an example of a nontrivial maximal ideal in $\ZZ$ and prove that it is maximal.


## 4
Let $R$ be a commutative ring with $1\neq 0$.
Recall that $x\in R$ is *nilpotent* iff $x^n = 0$ for some positive integer $n$.

a. Show that the collection of nilpotent elements in $R$ forms an ideal.

b. Show that if $x$ is nilpotent, then $x$ is contained in every prime ideal of $R$.

c. Suppose $x\in R$ is not nilpotent and let $S = \theset{x^n \suchthat n\in \NN}$.
  There is at least on ideal of $R$ disjoint from $S$, namely $(0)$.
  By Zorn's lemma the set of ideals disjoint from $S$ has a maximal element with respect to inclusion, say $I$.
  In other words, $I$ is disjoint from $S$ and if $J$ is any ideal disjoint from $S$ with $I\subseteq J \subseteq R$ then $J=I$ or $J=R$.

  Show that $I$ is a prime ideal.

d. Deduce from (a) and (b) that the set of nilpotent elements of $R$ is the intersection of all prime ideals of $R$.


## 5
Let $L/K$ be a finite extension of fields.

a. Define what it means for $L/K$ to be *separable*.

b. Show that if $K$ is a finite field, then $L/K$ is always separable.

c. Give an example of a finite extension $L/K$ that is not separable.


## 6
Let $K$ be the splitting field of $x^4-2$ over $\QQ$ and set $G = \gal(K/\QQ)$.

a. Show that $K/\QQ$ contains both $\QQ(i)$ and $\QQ(\sqrt[4]{2})$ and has degree 8 over $\QQ$/

b. Let $N = \gal(K/\QQ(i))$ and $H = \gal(K/\QQ(\sqrt[4]{2}))$.
  Show that $N$ is normal in $G$ and $NH = G$.

  > Hint: what field is fixed by $NH$?

c. Show that $\gal(K/\QQ)$ is generated by elements $\sigma, \tau$, of orders 4 and 2 respectively, with $\tau \sigma\tau\inv = \sigma\inv$.

  > Equivalently, show it is the dihedral group of order 8.

d. How many distinct quartic subfields of $K$ are there? 
  Justify your answer.

## 7
Let $F = \FF_2$ and let $\bar F$ denote its algebraic closure.

a. Show that $\bar F$ is not a finite extension of $F$.

b. Suppose that $\alpha \in \bar F$ satisfies $\alpha^{17} = 1$ and $\alpha\neq 1$.
  Show that $F(\alpha)/F$ has degree 8.

