# Fall 2014

## 1
Let $f\in \QQ[x]$ be an irreducible polynomial and $L$ a finite Galois extension of $\QQ$.
Let $f(x) = g_1(x)g_2(x)\cdots g_r(x)$ be a factorization of $f$ into irreducibles in $L[x]$.

a. Prove that each of the factors $g_i(x)$ has the same degree.

b. Give an example showing that if $L$ is not Galois over $\QQ$, the conclusion of part (a) need not hold.

## 2
Let $G$ be a group of order 96.

a. Show that $G$ has either one or three 2-Sylow subgroups.

b. Show that either $G$ has a normal subgroup of order 32, or a normal subgroup of order 16.


## 3
Consider the polynomial $f(x) = x^4 - 7 \in \QQ[x]$ and let $E/\QQ$ be the splitting field of $f$.

a. What is the structure of the Galois group of $E/\QQ$?

b. Give an explicit description of all of the intermediate subfields $\QQ \subset K \subset E$ in the form $K = \QQ(\alpha), \QQ(\alpha, \beta), \cdotrs$ where $\alpha, \beta$, etc are complex numbers.
  Describe the corresponding subgroups of the Galois group.


## 4
Let $F$ be a field and $T$ an $n\times n$ matrix with entries in $F$.
Let $I$ be the ideal consisting of all polynomials $f\in F[x]$ such that $f(T) =0$.

Show that the following statements are equivalent about a polynomial $g\in I$:

a. $g$ is irreducible.

b. If $k\in F[x]$ is nonzero and of degree strictly less than $g$, then $k[T]$ is an invertible matrix.


## 5
Let $T$ be a $5\times 5$ complex matrix with characteristic polynomial $\chi(x) = (x-3)^5$ and minimal polynomial $m(x) = (x-3)^2$.
Determine all possible Jordan forms of $T$.


## 6
Let $G$ be a group and $H, K < G$ be subgroups of finite index.
Show that
\begin{align*}
[G: H\intersect K] \leq [G: H] ~ [G:K]
.\end{align*}


## 7
Give a careful proof that $\CC[x, y]$ is not a PID.


## 8
Let $R$ be a nonzero commutative ring without unit such that $R$ does not contain a proper maximal ideal.
Prove that for all $x\in R$, the ideal $xR$ is proper.
You may assume the axiom of choice.

