# Linear Algebra: Diagonalizability

## Spring 2015 #3
Let $F$ be a field and $V$ a finite dimensional $F\dash$vector space, and let $A, B: V\to V$ be commuting $F\dash$linear maps.
Suppose there is a basis $\mcb_1$ with respect to which $A$ is diagonalizable and a basis $\mcb_2$ with respect to which $B$ is diagonalizable.

Prove that there is a basis $\mcb_3$ with respect to which $A$ and $B$ are both diagonalizable.

## Spring 2013 #6
Let $V$ be a finite dimensional vector space over a field $F$ and let $T: V\to V$ be a linear operator with characteristic polynomial $f(x) \in F[x]$.

a. Show that $f(x)$ is irreducible in $F[x] \iff$ there are no proper nonzero subspaces $W< V$ with $T(W) \subseteq W$.

b. If $f(x)$ is irreducible in $F[x]$ and the characteristic of $F$ is 0, show that $T$ is diagonalizable when we extend the field to its algebraic closure.

## Spring 2019 #1

Let $A$ be a square matrix over the complex numbers.
Suppose that $A$ is nonsingular
and that $A^{2019}$ is diagonalizable over $\CC$.

Show that $A$ is also diagonalizable over $\CC$.

## Fall 2017 #7
Let $F$ be a field and let $V$ and $W$ be vector spaces over $F$ . 

Make $V$ and $W$ into $F[x]\dash$modules via linear operators $T$ on $V$ and $S$ on $W$ by defining $X \cdot v = T (v)$ for all $v \in V$ and $X \cdot w = S(w)$ for all w $\in$ W . 

Denote the resulting $F[x]\dash$modules by $V_T$ and $W_S$ respectively.

(a) Show that an $F[x]\dash$module homomorphism from $V_T$ to $W_S$ consists of an $F\dash$linear transformation $R : V \to W$ such that $RT = SR$.

(b) Show that $VT \cong WS$ as $F[x]\dash$modules $\iff$ there is an $F\dash$linear isomorphism $P : V \to W$ such that $T = P\inv SP$.

(c) Recall that a module $M$ is *simple* if $M \neq 0$ and any proper submodule of $M$ must be zero. Suppose that $V$ has dimension 2. Give an example of $F$, $T$ with $V_T$ simple.

(d) Assume $F$ is algebraically closed. Prove that if $V$ has dimension 2, then any $V_T$ is not simple.

## Fall 2016 #2
Let $A, B$ be two $n\times n$ matrices with the property that $AB = BA$.
Suppose that $A$ and $B$ are diagonalizable.
Prove that $A$ and $B$ are *simultaneously* diagonalizable.

# Linear Algebra: Misc

## Fall 2012 #7
Let $k$ be a field of characteristic zero and $A, B \in M_n(k)$ be two square $n\times n$ matrices over $k$ such that $AB - BA = A$.
Prove that $\det A = 0$.

Moreover, when the characteristic of $k$ is 2, find a counterexample to this statement.

## Fall 2012 #8
Prove that any nondegenerate matrix $X\in M_n(\RR)$ can be written as $X = UT$ where $U$ is orthogonal and $T$ is upper triangular.

## Fall 2012 #5
Let $U$ be an infinite-dimensional vector space over a field $k$, $f: U\to U$ a linear map, and $\theset{u_1, \cdots, u_m} \subset U$ vectors such that $U$ is generated by $\theset{u_1, \cdots, u_m, f^d(u_1), \cdots, f^d(u_m)}$ for some $d\in \NN$.

Prove that $U$ can be written as a direct sum $U \cong V\oplus W$ such that 

1. $V$ has a basis consisting of some vector $v_1, \cdots v_n, f^d(v_1), \cdots, f^d(v_n)$ for some $d\in \NN$, and
2. $W$ is finite-dimensional.

Moreover, prove that for any other decomposition $U \cong V' \oplus W'$, one has $W' \cong W$.

## Fall 2015 #7

a. Show that two $3\times 3$ matrices over $\CC$ are similar $\iff$ their characteristic polynomials are equal and their minimal polynomials are equal.

b. Does the conclusion in (a) hold for $4\times 4$ matrices?
  Justify your answer with a proof or counterexample.

##  Fall 2018 #4

Let $V$ be a finite dimensional vector space over a field (the field is not necessarily algebraically closed).

Let $\phi : V \to V$ be a linear transformation. Prove that there exists a decomposition of $V$ as $V = U \oplus W$ , where $U$ and $W$ are $\phi\dash$invariant subspaces of $V$ , $\restrictionof{\phi}{U}$ is nilpotent, and $\restrictionof{\phi}{W}$ is nonsingular.

## Fall 2018 #5

Let $A$ be an $n \times n$ matrix.

(a) Suppose that $v$ is a column vector such that the set $\{v, Av, . . . , A^{n-1} v\}$ is linearly independent. Show that any matrix $B$ that commutes with $A$ is a polynomial in $A$.

(b) Show that there exists a column vector $v$ such that the set $\{v, Av, . . . , A^{n-1} v\}$ is linearly independent $\iff$ the characteristic polynomial of A equals the minimal polynomial of A.

## Fall 2019 #8

Let $\{e_1, \cdots, e_n \}$ be a basis of a real vector space $V$ and let
$$
\Lambda \definedas \theset{ \sum r_i e_i \mid r_i \in \ZZ}
$$

Let $\cdot$ be a non-degenerate ($v \cdot w = 0$ for all $w \in V \iff v = 0$) symmetric bilinear form on $V$ such that the Gram matrix $M = (e_i \cdot e_j )$ has integer entries.

Define the dual of $\Lambda$ to be

$$
\Lambda \dual \definedas \{v \in V \suchthat v \cdot x \in \ZZ \text{ for all } x \in \Lambda
\}
.$$

(a) Show that $\Lambda \subset \Lambda \dual$.

(b) Prove that $\det M \neq 0$ and that the rows of $M\inv$ span $\Lambda\dual$.

(c) Prove that $\det M = |\Lambda\dual /\Lambda|$.


## Spring 2012 #6
Let $k$ be a field and let the group $G = \GL(m, k) \cross \GL(n, k)$ acts on the set of $m\times n$ matrices $M_{m, n}(k)$ as follows:
\[
(A, B) \cdot X = AXB\inv
\]
where $(A, B) \in G$ and $X\in M_{m, n}(k)$.

a. State what it means for a group to act on a set.
  Prove that the above definition yields a group action.

b. Exhibit with justification a subset $S$ of $M_{m, n}(k)$ which contains precisely one element of each orbit under this action.

## Spring 2014 #7
Let $G = \GL(3, \QQ[x])$ be the group of invertible $3\times 3$ matrices over $\QQ[x]$.
For each $f\in \QQ[x]$, let $S_f$ be the set of $3\times 3$ matrices $A$ over $\QQ[x]$ such that $\det(A) = c f(x)$ for some nonzero constant $c\in \QQ$.

a. Show that for $(P, Q) \in G\cross G$ and $A\in S_f$, the formula
  \[
  (P, Q)\cdot A \definedas PAQ\inv
  \]
  gives a well defined map $G\cross G \cross S_f \to S_f$ and show that this map gives a group action of $G\cross G$ on $S_f$.

b. For $f(x) = x^3(x^2+1)^2$, give one representative from each orbit of the group action in (a), and justify your assertion.

## Fall 2014 #4
Let $F$ be a field and $T$ an $n\times n$ matrix with entries in $F$.
Let $I$ be the ideal consisting of all polynomials $f\in F[x]$ such that $f(T) =0$.

Show that the following statements are equivalent about a polynomial $g\in I$:

a. $g$ is irreducible.

b. If $k\in F[x]$ is nonzero and of degree strictly less than $g$, then $k[T]$ is an invertible matrix.

## Fall 2015 #8
Let $V$ be a vector space over a field $F$ and $V\dual$ its dual.
A *symmetric bilinear form* $(\wait, \wait)$ on $V$ is a map $V\cross V\to F$ satisfying
\[
(av_1 + b v_2, w) = a(v_1, w) + b(v_2, w) \qtext{and} (v_1, v_2) = (v_2, v_1)
\]
for all $a, b\in F$ and $v_1, v_2 \in V$.
The form is *nondegenerate* if the only element $w\in V$ satisfying $(v, w) = 0$ for all $v\in V$ is $w=0$.

Suppose $(\wait, \wait)$ is a nondegenerate symmetric bilinear form on $V$.
If $W$ is a subspace of $V$, define
\[
W\perp \definedas \theset{v\in V \suchthat (v, w) = 0 \text{ for all } w\in W}
.\]

a. Show that if $X, Y$ are subspaces of $V$ with $Y\subset X$, then $X\perp \subseteq Y\perp$.

b. Define an injective linear map 
  \[
  \psi: Y\perp/X\perp \injects (X/Y)\dual
  \]
  which is an isomorphism if $V$ is finite dimensional.

