# Fall 2021

## Fall 2021 #1

Let $G$ be a group. An automorphism $\phi: G \rightarrow G$ is called *inner* if the automorphism is given by conjugation by a fixed group element $g$, i.e.,
\[
\phi=\phi_{g}: h \mapsto g h g^{-1} .
\]

a.
Prove that the set of inner automorphisms forms a normal subgroup of the group of all automorphisms of $G$.

b.
Give an example of a finite group with an automorphism which is not inner.

c.
Denote by $S_{n}$ the group of permutations of the set $\{1, \ldots, n\}$. Suppose that $g \in S_{n}$ sends $i$ to $g_{i}$ for $i=1, \ldots, n .$ Let $(a, b)$ denote as usual the cycle notation for the transposition which permutes $a$ and $b$. For $i \in\{1, \ldots, n-1\}$, compute $\phi_{g}((i, i+1))$.

d.
Suppose that an automorphism $\phi \in \operatorname{Aut}\left(S_{n}\right)$ preserves cycle type, i.e., that for every element $s$ of $S_{n}, s$ and $\phi(s)$ have the same cycle type. Show that $\phi$ is inner. 

> Hint: Consider the images of generators $\phi((1,2)), \phi((2,3)), \cdots, \phi((n-1, n))$.

## Fall 2021 #2

Give generators and relations for the non-commutative group $G$ of order 63 containing an element of order $9 .$


:::{.solution}
\envlist

- Idea: take a semidirect product involving $C_9$ and $C_7$.
  We'll need some facts: $\Hom(C_m, C_n) \cong C_d$ where $d = \gcd(m, n)$, and $\Aut(C_m)\cong C_m\units$ which has order $\phi(m)$ (since one needs to send generators to generators), which can be explicitly calculated based on the prime factorization of $m$.

- Some calculations we'll need:
  - $\Aut(C_9) \cong C_9\units \cong C_{\phi(9)} \cong C_6$, using that $\phi(p^k) = p^{k-1}(p-1)$.
  - $\Aut(C_7) \cong C_7\units \cong C_{\phi(7)}\cong C_6$ using that $\phi(p) = p-1$.
- To get a nonabelian group, we need a nontrivial semidirect product, so look at $\Hom(G, \Aut(H))$ in the two possible combinations.
  - $\Hom(C_7, \Aut(C_9)) \cong \Hom(C_7, C_6) \cong C_1 \da \ts{e}$ using that $\Hom(C_m, C_n) \cong C_{d}$ for $d = \gcd(m, n)$.
    So there are no nontrivial homs here, so only the direct product is possible.
  - $\Hom(C_9, \Aut(C_7)) \cong \Hom(C_9, C_6) \cong C_3$, so use this!
  - Note that we don't have to consider possibilities for $C_3\cross C_3$, since including this as a factor would yield no elements of order 9.

- So take $G\da C_7 \semidirect_\psi C_9$ for some $\psi: C_9 \to \Aut(C_7)$, and we can take the presentation
\[
G = \gens{x, y\st x^7, y^9, yxy\inv = \psi(x)}
.\]

- It now suffices to find a nontrivial $\psi: C_7\to C_7$.
  Writing it multiplicatively as $C_7 = \gens{x\st x^7}$, any map that sends $x$ to a generator will do.
  It suffices to choose any $k$ coprime to $7$, and then take $\psi(x) \da x^k$, which will be another generator.

- So take 

\[
G = \gens{x, y\st x^7, y^9, yxy\inv = x^2}
.\]
:::


## Fall 2021 #3

What is the Jordan normal form over $\mathbb{C}$ of a $7 \times 7$ matrix $A$ which satisfies all of the following conditions:

a.
$A$ has real coefficients,

b.
$\mathrm{rk} A=5$,

c.
$\mathrm{rk} A^{2}=4$,

d.
$\mathrm{rk} A-I=6$,

e.
$\mathrm{rk} A^{3}-I=4$,

f.
$\operatorname{tr} A=1 ?$


:::{.solution}
\envlist

- We'll use rank-nullity throughout: $\rank M + \dim \ker M = 7$.
- Also note that 
\[
Av = \lambda v
\implies
A^nv = A^{n-1}Av = A^{n-1}\lambda v = \cdots = \lambda^n v
,\]
  so if $\lambda \in \spec(A)$ then $\lambda^n\in \spec(A^n)$.
  Conversely, $\lambda\in \spec(A^n) \implies \lambda^{1\over n}\in \spec(A)$, which we'll use several times.
- Since $5 = \rank A = \rank(A - 0\cdot I)$,  we have $\dim \ker(A-0\cdot I) = 2$ contributing an eigenvalue of $\lambda = 0$ with multiplicity $2$.

- Since $4 = \rank A^2 = \rank(A^2 - 0\cdot \lambda) = \rank(A-0\cdot \lambda)^2$, we have that $\dim \ker(A-0\cdot I)^2 = 3$.
  Since $\dim \ker (A-0\cdot I)^1 = 2 < 3$, this means there is 1 generalized eigenvector associated to $\lambda = 0$.

- Since $6 = \rank(A-1\cdot I)$, $\dim \ker (A- 1\cdot I) = 1$, contributing $\lambda = 1$ with multiplicity 1.
- Since $\rank(A^3-1\cdot I) = 4$, we have $\dim \ker (A^3-1\cdot I) = 3$, contributing $\lambda = 1$ *now to $\spec(A^3)$* instead of $\spec(A)$.
  Thus some unknown cube roots of 1 are contributed to $\spec(A)$, so any of $1=\zeta_3^0, \zeta_3, \zeta_3^2$ are possibilities at this point.
  Call these three contributions $z_1, z_2, z_3$, which may not be distinct.

- Now use that $\tr(A) = \sum_{i=1}^n \lambda_i$ is the sum of the diagonal on $\JCF(A)$, using that trace is a similarity invariant, to write
\[
1 = \tr(A) = (0 + 0) + (0) + (1) + (z_1 + z_2 + z_3) \implies z_1 + z_2 + z_3 = 0 
,\]
which is actually enough to force $z_1 = 1, z_2 = \zeta_3, z_3 = \zeta_3^2$, since no other combination sums to zero.
That $1 + \zeta_3 + \zeta_3^2 = 0$ is a general fact.

- Since $\lambda=1$ occurs twice as an eigenvalue but $\dim \ker(A-1\cdot I) = 1$, the two copies of $\lambda = 1$ must occur in a nontrivial Jordan block.
- So we get a Jordan form
\[
\JCF(A) = 
\begin{bmatrix}
0 & & & & & & 
\\
& 0 & 1 & & & & 
\\
& & 0 & & & & 
\\
& & & 1 & 1 & & 
\\
& & & & 1 & & 
\\
& & & & & \zeta_3 & 
\\
& & & & & & \zeta_3^2
\\
\end{bmatrix}
.\]



:::


## Fall 2021 #4

Recall that for a given positive integer $n$, the cyclotomic field $\mathbb{Q}\left(\zeta_{n}\right)$ is generated by
a primitive $n$-th root of unity $\zeta_{n}$.

a.
What is the degree of $Q\left(\zeta_{n}\right)$ over $Q$ ?

b.
Define what it means for a finite field extension $L / K$ to be Galois, and prove that the cyclotomic field $Q\left(\zeta_{n}\right)$ is Galois over $\mathbb{Q}$.

c.
What is the Galois group of $\mathbb{Q}\left(\zeta_{n}\right)$ over $\mathbb{Q}$ ?

d.
How many subfields of $\mathbb{Q}\left(\zeta_{2021}\right)$ have degree 2 over Q? Note that $2021=43 \cdot 47$


## Fall 2021 #5

Let $R$ be an algebra over $\mathbb{C}$ which is finite-dimensional as a $\CC\dash$vector space. Recall that an ideal $I$ of $R$ can be considered as a $\CC\dash$subvector space of $R$. We define the codimension of $I$ in $R$ to be 
\[
\codim_R I \da 
\dim_{\CC} R - \dim_{\CC} I
,\] 
the difference between the dimension of $R$ as a $\mathbb{C}\dash$vector space, $\dim_{\CC} R$, and the dimension of $I$ as a $\CC\dash$vector space, $\dim_\CC I$.

a.
Show that any maximal ideal $m \subset R$ has codimension 1 .

b.
Suppose that $\operatorname{dim}_{C} R=2$. Show that there exists a surjective homomorphism of $\CC\dash$algebras from the polynomial ring $\CC[t]$ to $R$.

c.
Classify such algebras $R$ for which $\dim_{\CC} R=2$, and list their maximal ideals.


## Fall 2021 #6

Let $R$ be a commutative ring with unit and let $M$ be an $R$-module. Define the annihilator of $M$ to be
\[
\operatorname{Ann}(M):=\{r \in R \mid r \cdot m=0 \text { for all } m \in M\}
\]

a.
Prove that $\operatorname{Ann}(M)$ is an ideal in $R$.

b.
Conversely, prove that every ideal in $R$ is the annihilator of some $R$-module.

c.
Give an example of a module $M$ over a ring $R$ such that each element $m \in M$ has a nontrivial annihilator $\operatorname{Ann}(m):=\{r \in R \mid r \cdot m=0\}$, but $\operatorname{Ann}(M)=\{0\}$
