# Spring 2013

## 6

### a

Let $f$ be the characteristic polynomial of $T$.

$\implies$:

- By contrapositive, suppose there is a proper nonzero invariant subspace $W<V$ with $T(W) \subseteq W$, we will show the characteristic polynomial $f \definedas \chi_{V, T}(x)$ is reducible.
- Since $T(W)\subseteq W$, the restriction $g\definedas \chi_{V, T}(x) \mid_W: W\to W$ is a linear operator on $W$.
- Claim: $g$ divides $f$ in $\FF[x]$ and $\deg(g) < \deg(f)$.
  - Matrix-dependent proof: \todo{Is there a proof without matrices? What if $V$ is infinite dimensional?}
    - Choose an ordered basis for $W$, say $\mcb_W \definedas \theset{\vector w_1, \cdots, \vector w_k}$ where $k=\dim_F(W)$
    - Claim: this can be extended to a basis of $V$, say $\mcb_V \definedas \theset{\vector w_1, \cdots, \vector w_k, \vector v_1, \cdots, \vector v_j}$ where $k+j = \dim_F(V)$.\todo{How to extend basis?}
      - Note that since $W<V$ is proper, $j\geq 1$.
    - Restrict $T$ to $W$ to get $T_W$, then let $B = [T_W]_{\mcb_W}$ be the matrix representation of $T_W$ with respect to $\mcb_W$.
    - Now consider the matrix representation $[T]_{\mcb_V}$, in block form this is given by
    \begin{align*}
    [T]_{\mcb_V} = 
    \begin{bmatrix}
    B & C \\
    0 & D
    \end{bmatrix}
    \end{align*}
      where we've used that $W<V$ is proper to get the existence of $C, D$ (there is at least one additional row/column since $j\geq 1$ in the extended basis.)
    \todo{Why?}
    - Now expand along the first column block to obtain
    \begin{align*}
    \chi_{T, V}(x) \definedas \det([T]_{\mcb_V} - xI) = \det(B - xI)\cdot \det(D - xI) \definedas \chi_{T, W}(x) \cdot \det(D-xI)
    .\end{align*}
    - Claim: $\det(D - xI) \in xF[x]$ is nontrivial
    - The claim follows because this forces $\deg(\det(D-xI)) \geq 1$ and so $\chi_{T, W}(x)$ is a proper divisor of $\chi_{T, V}(x)$.
- Thus $f$ is reducible.

$\impliedby$

- ?

### b

Characterization of diagonalizability: $T$ is diagonalizable over $F \iff \min_{T, F}$ is squarefree in $\bar{F}[x]$?

- Let $\min_{T, F}(x)$ be the minimal polynomial of $T$ and $\chi_{T, F}(x)$ be its characteristic polynomial.
- By Cayley-Hamilton, $\min_{T, F}(x)$ divides $\chi_{T, F}$
- Since $\chi_{T, F}$ is irreducible, these polynomials are equal.
- Claim: $T/F$ is diagonalizable $\iff \min_{T, F}$ splits over $F$ and is squarefree.
- Replace $F$ with its algebraic closure, then $\min_{T, F}$ splits.
- Claim: in characteristic zero, every irreducible polynomial is separable
- So $\min_{T, F}$ splits into distinct linear factors
- Thus $T$ is diagonalizable.
