# Ring Theory


:::{.proposition title="Subring criteria"}
A subset $S\subseteq R$ is a subring iff

- $(S, +)$ forms an abelian subgroup (so closed under addition and contains inverses)
- $(S, \cdot)$ forms a submonoid (so closed under multiplication)

:::


:::{.proposition title="Ideal Operations"}
\envlist

- $I + J = \ts{i+j \st i\in I, j\in J} = \gens{I, J}$ is the smallest ideal containing $I$ and $J$.
- $IJ = \ts{\sum_{k\leq N} x_k y_k \st x_k\in I, y_k \in J, N\in \ZZ^{\geq 0}}$ is the ideal generated by all finite sums of products.
- $I \intersect J$ is an ideal, $I\union J$ is generally **not** an ideal
- Ideals are *comaximal* if $I + J = \gens{ 1 }$.
- If $I+J = \gens{ 1 }$ then $I \intersect J = IJ$. 
:::


:::{.definition title="Ideal generated by a set"}
The ideal **generated** by $\ts{a, b}$ is defined as 
\[
\gens{a, b} \da Ra + Rb \da \ts{ r_1 a + r_2 b \st r_i \in R}
.\]

More generally for a set $S = \ts{s_k}$,
\[
\gens{S} \da \sum_{k=1}^{\# S} Rs_k \da \ts{ \sum r_k s_k \st r_k\in R, s_k\in S}
.\]
:::


:::{.example title="?"}

- $\gens{p, q} = \gens{\gcd(p, q)} \normal \ZZ$.

:::



## Isomorphism Theorems

:::{.remark}
These are all basically the same for modules.
:::

:::{.proposition title="First Isomorphism Theorem"}
For any ring morphism $f:A\to B$ there is SES of rings
\[
0 \to \ker f \to A \to \im(f) \to 0
,\]
and thus $A/\ker f \cong \im f$.
If $f$ is surjective, then $A/\ker f \cong B$.

More traditionally stated:

- $\ker \phi \in \Id(A)$
- $\im \phi \leq B$ is a subring (not necessarily an ideal)
- $R/\ker \phi \cong \im \phi$.
:::


:::{.proposition title="Second Isomorphism Theorem"}
Let $R\in \Ring, S\leq R, I\in \Id(R)$, then there is an isomorphism:
\[
{S+I \over I} \mveq {S\over S \intersect I}
.\]

Where it's also true that this statement makes sense:

- $S+I \leq R$ is a subring.
- $S \intersect I \normal S$
:::


:::{.proposition title="Third Isomorphism Theorem"}
For $I\in \Id(R)$, the canonical quotient map $\phi: R \to R/I$ induces a bijective correspondence:
\[
\correspond{
  J \in \Id(R) \st J\contains I
}
&\mapstofrom
  \Id(R/I) \\
J \da \phi\inv(\bar J) &\mapsfrom \bar{J} \\
J &\mapsto \bar{J} \da \phi(J) 
,\]
where $\phi: R\to R/I$ is the canonical quotient morphism.

More traditionally:

- If $S, I \in \Id(R)$ with $S$ containing $I$ then
\[
S/I \leq R/I
.\]

- Every ideal in $\Id(R/I)$ is of the form $\bar{S} \da S/I$ for some $S\in \Id(R)$ containing $I$.

- If $I, J \in \Id(R)$ with $I \subseteq J \subseteq R$ then there is an isomorphism
\[
{R/I \over J/I} \mveq {R\over J}
.\]

Moreover, $A\leq R$ is a subring containing $I$ iff $A/I \in \Id(R/I)$.
:::


:::{.exercise title="?"}
Show that if $J\in \Id(R)$ (with $J\contains I$) is radical/prime/maximal iff $\bar J \in \Id(R/I)$ is radical/prime/maximal.
:::



## Important Techniques


:::{.proposition title="Fields are simple"}
$R \in \Field \iff \Id(R) = \ts{ 0, R }$.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
$\implies$:
If $0\neq x\in I\normal R$, using that $R\nonzero = R\units$, $x$ is a unit.
So $x\inv \in R$, and $xx\inv \da 1 \in I$ so $I = R$.

$\impliedby$:
Let $x\in R\nonzero$, then $Rx = R$ so $1\in Rx$ and $1=rx$ for some $r\in R$.
This forces $x=r\inv$.
:::



:::{.proposition title="Showing ideals are maximal/prime with quotients"}
\envlist

- $R/\mfm$ is a field $\iff \mfm \in \mspec(R)$ is maximal.
- $R/\mfp$ is an integral domain $\iff \mfp \in \spec(R)$ is prime.
- $R/J$ is reduced $\iff J$ is radical.
:::


:::{.proof title="of 1"}
Use the ideal correspondence theorem: $\Id(R/\mfm)$ are ideals of $R$ containing $\mfm$:
\[
&\quad R/\mfm \in \Field \\
&\iff \not\exists J/\mfm \in \Id(R/\mfm)\nonzero \text{ such that } J \in \Id(R) \\
&\iff \not\exists \mfm \subsetneq J \subsetneq R \\
&\iff J\in \mspec(R)
.\]

:::


:::{.proof title="of 2"}
$\impliedby$:
Show $xy = 0$ with $x\neq 0$ forces $y=0$.
Let $x, y\in \mfp \in \spec R$, so $x = a + I, y = b + I$ for some $a,b\in R$.
If $xy=0 \mod \mfp$ with $y\neq 0\mod \mfp$, we can check
\[
xy = (a+\mfp)(b+\mfp) \da (ab) + \mfp = 0 + \mfp \implies ab\in \mfp
.\]
Since $\mfp$ is prime and $x\neq 0 \implies a\not\in\mfp$, so $b\in \mfp$.
But then 
\[
y \da b + \mfp = 0 + \mfp = 0 \mod \mfp
.\]

$\implies$:
Let $a,b\in R$ with $xy\in \mfp$, we want to show that if $x\not \in \mfp$ then $y\in \mfp$.
Note $x\not \in \mfp \iff x \cong 0 \mod \mfp$.
Setting $x\da a + \mfp, y\da b + \mfp$ yields
\[
xy \da (a+\mfp)(b+\mfp) \da ab + \mfp = 0 \mod \mfp
.\]
Since $R/\mfp$ is a domain, assuming $x\neq 0 \mod \mfp$ we have $y = 0 \mod \mfp$, so $y\in \mfp$.




:::

:::{.remark}
Note that this yields a quick proof that $\mspec R \subseteq \spec R$, using that $\Field \leq \mathsf{IntDomain}$:
\[
I \text{ maximal } \iff R/I \in \Field {\color{blue} \implies } R/I \in \mathsf{IntDomain} \iff I \text{ prime}
.\]
:::


:::{.fact}
If $\mfm$ is maximal and $x \in R\sm \mfm$ then $\mfm + Rx = R = \gens{ 1}$.
:::






## Undergrad Review

:::{.remark}
Notation: 

- \( \gens{ a } \da Ra \da \ts{ ra \st r \in R }  \) is the ideal generated by a single element.
- $R = \gens{ 1 }$ is equivalently the ideal generated by 1. 
:::

### Basics 


:::{.definition title="Ring"}
A **ring** is a triple $(R, +, \cdot) \in \CRing$ such that 

- $(R, +)\in \Ab\Grp$,
- $(R, \cdot) \in \Monoid$
- Distributivity: $a(b+c) = ab + ac$.
:::

:::{.example title="of rings"}
Some of the most important examples of rings:

- The usual suspects: $\ZZ, \QQ$
  - Their analogs: number fields $K \da \QQ(\zeta)$, their rings of integers $\ZZ_K$ or $\OO_K$,
- Gaussian integers $\ZZ(i)$
- Fields $k = \FFpn, \RR$
- Fraction fields of rings $\ff(R)$, e.g. $\ff(\ZZ) = \QQ$.
- Polynomial rings $R\adjoin{\elts{x}{n}}$, particularly for $R=k$ a field
- Power series rings $R\powerseries{\elts{x}{n}}$.
  - Formal power series rings $R\formalpowerseries{\elts{x}{n}}$.
- $\ZZpadic \da \ts{a/b \st p \notdivides b }$ the ring of $p\dash$adic integers
- Rings of germs, e.g. $C^\infty(X, Y)$ where $f\sim g$ iff there exists some $U \subseteq X$ with $\ro{f}{U} = \ro{g}{U}$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Ring Morphism"}
A morphism $f\in \CRing(X, Y)$ satisfies:

- $f(1_X) = 1_Y$
- $f(a(b+c)) = f(a)f(b) + f(a)f(c)$
:::

:::{.remark}
Important notes:

- $\ker f \da f\inv(\ts{0})$.
- A bijective ring morphisms is automatically an isomorphism in $\CRing$.
- $\ker f \normal X$ is an ideal, but $\im f \leq Y$ is only a subring in general.
- For any ideal $I\normal R$ there is a quotient map $R\to R/I$, it's useful to write cosets as $a+I$.
- For quotients, $x \equiv y \mod I \iff x-y \in I$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Ideal"}
An **ideal** $I\normal R$ is a subset where $(I, +) \leq (R, +) \in \Grp$ is a subgroup and for $x\in R, i\in I$, $xi \in I$.
Equivalently,

- $RI \subseteq I$
- $I + I \subseteq I$

Note that $0$ is in every ideal.
:::


:::{.definition title="Characteristic"}
Using that every ring has a $\mods{\ZZ}$ structure, the **characteristic** of a ring $R$ is the smallest $n$ such that $n\actson 1_R = 0_R$, i.e. $\sum_{i=1}^n 1_R = 0_R$.

:::


### Elements  

:::{.definition title="Divisibility of Elements"}
An element \( r\in R \) is **divisible** by \( q \in R \) if and only if there exists some \( c \in R \) such that \( r = qc \).
In this case, we sometimes write \( q\divides r \).
:::

:::{.definition title="Units"}
An element $r\in R$ is a **unit** if $r\divides 1$: there exists an $s\in R$ such that $rs = sr = 1$.
Then $r\inv \da s$ is uniquely determined, and the set of units $(R\units, \cdot) \in \Ab\Grp$ forms a group.

:::

:::{.definition title="Irreducible Element"}
An element $r\in R$ is **irreducible** iff 
\[
r=ab \implies a \in R\units \text{ or }  b\in R\units
\]
:::

:::{.definition title="Prime Element"}
An element $p\in R$ is **prime** iff 
\[  
a,b \in R\units\smz, \quad ab\divides p \implies a\divides p \text{ or }  b\divides p
.\]
:::

:::{.fact}
If $R$ is an integral domain, prime $\implies$ irreducible.
If $R$ is a UFD, then irreducible $\implies$ prime, so this is an iff.
:::

:::{.definition title="Associate Elements"}
$a, b\in R$ are **associates** iff there exists a $u\in R\units$ such that $a = ub$. 
Equivalently, $a\divides b$ and $b\divides a$.
:::

### Ideals


:::{.example title="of specs"}
\envlist

- $\Id(\ZZ) = \ts{ \gens{m} \st m \in \ZZ^{\geq 0}}$
- $\mspec \ZZ = \ts{ \gens{p} \st p\neq 0 \text{ is prime} }$
- $\spec \ZZ = \mspec \ZZ \union \ts{ \gens{0} }$.
- For $k$ a field and $f\in \kxn$ irreducible, $\gens{f} \in \spec \kxn$.
  - $\mfm \da \ts{ f = \sum_I a_I x^I\in \kxn \st a_0 = 0  } \in \mspec \kxn$ (i.e. this is the ideal of polynomials with no constant term).

:::


:::{.proposition title="Proper ideals contain no units"}
If $I\normal R$ is a proper ideal $\iff I$ contains no units.
:::

:::{.proof}
$r\in R\units \intersect I \implies r\inv r \in I \implies 1\in I \implies x\cdot 1 \in I \quad \forall x\in R$.
:::

:::{.proposition}
If $I_1 \subseteq I_2 \subseteq \cdots$ are ideals then $\union_j I_j$ is an ideal.
:::

:::{.definition title="Irreducible Ideal"}
An ideal $I\normal R$ is **irreducible** if it can not be written as the intersection of two larger ideals, i.e. there are not $J_1, J_2 \supseteq I$ such that $J_1 \intersect J_2 = I$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Prime Ideal"}
$\mfp$ is a **prime** ideal $\iff$
\[ 
ab\in \mfp \implies a\in \mfp \text{ or } b\in \mfp
.\]
:::

:::{.proposition title="Prime implies irreducible for UFDs"}
In $R$ a UFD, an element $r\in R$ is prime $\iff r$ is irreducible.
:::

:::{.example title="of why the converse doesn't hold"}
For $R$ an integral domain, prime $\implies$ irreducible, but generally not the converse.
Take $R \da k[x, y]/\gens{x^2-y^3} \cong k[x^2, y^3]$, which is a domain,
But here $[x^2] = [y^3]$ as equivalence classes where $[y^3]$ is irreducible since every element in $r\in R$ has $\deg_y(r) = 0,3,6,\cdots$.
But $[y^3]$ is not prime since it divides $[x^2]$ but doesn't divide $[x]$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Prime Spectrum"}
The **prime spectrum** (or just the **spectrum**) of $R$ is defined as 
\[
\spec(R) = \theset{\mfp \normal R \suchthat \mfp \text{ is prime}}
.\]
:::

:::{.definition title="Maximal Ideal"}
An ideal $\mfm$ is **maximal** iff whenever $I\normal R$ with $\mfm \subsetneq I$ a proper containment then $I = R$.
:::





:::{.example title="Some counterexamples"}
Some examples.
Reminder: maximal always implies prime, and for PIDs, prime *and nonzero* implies maximal.
Maximals quotient to fields, primes to domains.

- Prime and maximal: 
  - $p\ZZ \in \Id(\ZZ)$.
    Maximal (and thus prime) since $\ZZ/p$ is a field and a domain.
  - $\gens{2, x} \in \Id(\ZZ[x])$.
    Maximal (and thus prime) $\ZZ[x]/\gens{2, x} \cong \ZZ/2$ is a field and a domain.
- Prime but not maximal: 
  - $\gens{0} \in \Id(\ZZ)$, since $m\ZZ \contains \gens{0}$ for any $m$.
  - $\gens{x} \in R[x]$ over any integral domain since $R[x]/\gens{x} \cong R$ is a domain (making it maximal), but $R$ can be chosen not to be a field (making it non-prime).
- Not prime, not maximal:
  - $m\ZZ \in \Id(\ZZ)$, since $m$ composite implies $\ZZ/m$ is not a domain since it has nonzero zero divisors. 
    For example, in $\ZZ/6$, $[3]$ is a zero divisors since $[2][3] = 0$.
- Useful examples:
  - $\mspec \ZZ = \ts{p\ZZ}$ and $\spec \ZZ = \ts{p\ZZ} \union \gens{0}$.
  - $\mspec \CC[x] = \ts{x-a \st a\in \CC}$, since over a PID $\gens{\alpha}$ is maximal iff $\alpha$ is irreducible, and over $\CC$ irreducibles are degree 1.
  - $\mspec \kx{n} = \ts{\gens{x-a_1, x-a_2, \cdots, x-a_n} \st a_k \in k}$.

- A ring with no maximal ideals: the Prüfer $p\dash$group $\ZZ(p^\infty) = \ts{\zeta_{p^k}}_{k=1}^{\infty}$ with the trivial ring structure $xy = 0$.
  The subgroups are $H_k \da \ts{\zeta_{p^k}}$, which form an increasing chain that doesn't stabilize.
:::

:::{.definition title="Max Spectrum"}
The **max spectrum** of $R$ is defined as 
\[
\mspec(R) = \theset{\mfm \normal R \suchthat \mfm \text{ is maximal}}
.\]
:::

:::{.example title="An irreducible element that is not prime."}
$3\in \ZZ[\sqrt{-5}]$. 
Check norm to see irreducibility, but $3 \divides 9 = (2+\sqrt{-5})(2-\sqrt{-5})$ and doesn't divide either factor.
:::

:::{.example}
Maximal ideals of $R[x]$ are of the form $I = (x - a_i)$ for some $a_i \in R$.
:::

## Types of Rings

:::{.definition title="Division ring or skew field"}
A **division ring** is any (potentially noncommutative) ring $R$ for which $R\smz \subset \RR\units$, i.e. every nonzero element is a unit and thus has a multiplicative inverse.
:::

:::{.definition title="Zero Divisor"}
An element $r\in R$ is a **zero-divisor** iff there exists an $a\in R\smz$ such that $ar = ra = 0$, i.e. $r\divides 0$.
Equivalently, the map
\[  
r\cdot: R &\to R \\
x &\mapsto rx
\]
fails to be injective.
:::

:::{.definition title="Integral Domain"}
A ring is an **integral domain** if and only if it has no nonzero zero divisors:
\[  
a, b\in R\smz, ab = 0 \implies a = 0 \txt{ or } b = 0
.\]
:::

:::{.example title="of integral domains"}
Examples of integral domains: $\ZZ, k\adjoin{\elts{x}{n}}$.
Non-examples: $\ZZ/6, \Mat(2\times 2; k)$
:::

:::{.definition title="Field"}
A **field** is a commutative division ring, i.e. every nonzero element is a uni, i.e. every nonzero element is a unit
:::

:::{.exercise title="?"}
Show that TFAE:

- $A\in \Field$
- $A$ is a simple ring, so $\Id(A) = \ts{ 0, A }$.
- If $B\in \Field$ is nonzero then every ring morphism $A\to B$ is injective.
:::

:::{.remark}
Every field is an integral domain, but e.g. $\ZZ$ is an integral domain that is not a field.

:::

:::{.definition title="Principal Ideal"}
An ideal $I \normal R$ if **principal** if there exists an $a\in R$ such that $I = \gens{a}$, i.e. $I = Ra$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Principal Ideal Domain"}
A ring $R$ is a **principal ideal domain** iff every ideal is principal.
:::

:::{.exercise title="?"}
Show that if $R$ is a PID then $\spec R \subseteq \mspec R$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Unique Factorization Domain"}
A ring $R$ is a **unique factorization domain** iff $R$ is an integral domain and every $r\in R\smz$ admits a decomposition
\[  
r = u \prod_{i=1}^n p_i
\]
where $u\in R\units$ and the $p_i$ irreducible, which is unique up to associates.
:::

:::{.definition title="Noetherian"}
A ring $R$ is **Noetherian** if the ACC holds: every ascending chain of ideals $I_1 \leq I_2 \cdots$ stabilizes in the sense that there exists some $N$ such that $I_N = I_{N+1} = \cdots$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Reduced Ring"}
A ring $R$ is **reduced** if $R$ contains no nonzero nilpotent elements. 
:::

:::{.definition title="Local Ring"}
A ring $R$ is **local** iff it contains a unique maximal ideal $\mfm$, so $\mspec R = \ts{ 0, \mfm}$.
As a consequence, there is a uniquely associated **residue field** $\kappa \da R/\mfm$.
:::

:::{.exercise title="?"}
Show that if $R$ is a nonzero ring where every element is either a unit or nilpotent, then $R$ is local.
:::

:::{.exercise title="?"}
Show that if $p\in \spec R$ then $R\localize{p}$ is local.
:::

:::{.exercise title="?"}
Suppose $\mfm \in \mspec R$ is a proper maximal ideal.
Show that under either of the following two conditions, $R$ is local:

- $R\sm \mfm \subseteq R\units$, so every element of $R\sm \mfm$ is a unit, or
- $1 + \mfm \subseteq R\units$

:::

:::{.solution}
- Sketch: $\mfm$ must contain every non-unit.
  - If $I \neq R$ then $I$ contains no units, so $I\subseteq N \da R\sm R\units$, i.e. $I$ is contained in the non-units.
    But $N \subseteq \mfm$ since no element of $\mfm$ is a unit and no element of $R\sm \mfm$ is a non-unit.

- Sketch: show that every $r\in R\sm \mfm$ is a unit and apply the first part.
  - If $r\in R\sm \mfm$ then $\gens{r, \mfm} = R = \gens{ 1 }$ so $rt + m = 1$ for some $t\in R, m\in \mfm$, so $rt = 1-m \in 1 + \mfm \subseteq R\units$ by assumption.
    Now apply (1).
:::

:::{.definition title="Dedekind Domains"}
A **Dedekind domain** is an integral domain for which the monoid $\Id(R)$ of nonzero ideals of $R$ satisfies unique factorization: every ideal can be decomposed uniquely into a product of prime ideals.
:::

:::{.exercise title="?"}
Show that a Dedekind domain $R$ is a PID iff $R$ is a UFD.
:::

:::{.definition title="Valuation Ring"}
A **valuation ring** is an integral domain $R$ such that for every $x\in \ff(R)$, $x\in R$ or $x\inv \in R$.

:::

:::{.definition title="Discrete Valuation Rings"}
A **discrete valuation ring** or **DVR** is a local PID with a *unique* maximal ideal.

:::

:::{.definition title="Regular ring"}
A commutative ring $R$ is **regular** if $R$ is Noetherian and for every $p\in \spec R$ the localization $R\localize{p}$ is a *regular local ring*: it has a maximal ideal $\mfm$ which admits a minimal generating set of $n$ elements where $n$ is the Krull dimension of $R\localize{p}$.
:::

:::{.remark}
Motivation: if $R = \OO_{X, x}$ is the ring of germs at $x$ of an algebraic variety $X$, then $R$ is regular iff $X$ is nonsingular at $x$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Gorenstein Rings"}
A commutative Noetherian ring $R$ is **Gorenstein** iff $R$ viewed as an $R\dash$module has finite injective dimension.
:::

:::{.example title="Why care about Gorenstein rings?"}
If $R\in \gr\kAlg$ with $\dim_k R < \infty$, then $R$ decomposes as $R = R_0 \oplus R_1 \oplus \cdots R_n$ with $R_0 \da k$, and $R$ is Gorenstein iff $R$ satisfies "Poincaré duality": $\dim_k R_0 = \dim_k R_m = 1$ and there is a perfect pairing $R_i \tensor_k R_{n-j} \to R_n$.
:::

## Comparing and Transporting Ring Types

:::{.proposition title="Big chain of inclusions"}
Fields $\subset$ Euclidean domains  $\subset$  PIDs $\subset$ UFDs $\subset$ Integral Domains  $\subset$ Rings
:::


:::{.remark}
Mnemonics:

- Field $\implies$ UFD: given $x,y$ we need to write $x=qy+r$, so just take $q=y\inv$ and $r=0$.
:::


:::{.proposition title="PID implies UFD"}
If $R$ is a PID, then every element in $R$ has a unique prime factorization.
:::

:::{.example title="showing these inclusions are strict"}
\envlist

- A Euclidean Domain that is not a field: $\FF[x]$ for $\FF$ a field
  - *Proof*: Use previous lemma, and $x$ is not invertible

- A PID that is not a Euclidean Domain: $\ZZ\left[\frac{1 + \sqrt{-19}}{2}\right]$.
  - *Proof*: complicated.

- A UFD that is not a PID: $\ZZ[x]$.
  - *Proof*: $\ZZ$ a UFD implies $\ZZ[x]$ is a UFD, but  $\gens{2, x} = 2\ZZ[x] + x\ZZ[x] = \ts{\sum r_ix^i \st r_0 \in 2\ZZ}$ is not principal. 
    Why: if $\gens{2, x} = \gens{f}$ and $f$ is constant, then every polynomial in this ideal has even coefficients and thus misses $g(x) \da x$.
    Otherwise, $\deg f \geq 1$ and we miss 2, which has degree zero.

-  An integral domain that is not a UFD: $\ZZ[\sqrt{-5}]$
   - *Proof*: $(2+\sqrt{-5})(2-\sqrt{-5})=9=3\cdot 3$, where all factors are irreducible (check norm).

-  A ring that is not an integral domain: $\ZZ/(4)$
   - *Proof*: $2 \mod 4$ is a zero divisor.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Polynomial rings over fields have division"}
If $\FF$ a field then $\FF[x]$ is a Euclidean domain.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Characterizations of Rings"}
\envlist

- $R$ a commutative division ring $\implies R$ is a field
- $R$ a finite integral domain $\implies R$ is a field.
- $\FF$ a field $\iff \FF[x]$ is a PID.
- $\FF$ is a field $\iff \FF$ is a commutative simple ring.
- $R$ is a UFD $\iff R[x]$ is a UFD.
- $R$ a PID $\implies R[x]$ is a UFD
- $R$ a PID $\implies R$ Noetherian
- $R[x]$ a PID $\implies R$ is a field.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
A polynomial ring over a PID is not necessarily a PID: take $\gens{2, x} \normal \ZZ[x]$.
:::

## Radicals

:::{.definition title="Radical of an Ideal"}
For an ideal $I\normal R$, the **radical** 
\[
\rad{I} \definedas \theset{r\in R\suchthat r^n\in I\text{ for some } n\geq 0}
,\] 
so $x^n \in I \implies x\in \rad{I}$.
:::

:::{.remark}
In general, "radical" refers to "bad elements" of some type to be quotiented out, not necessarily $\sqrt{\wait}$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Radical Ideal"}
An ideal is **radical** iff $\rad{I} = I$. 
:::

:::{.definition title="Nilpotent"}
An element $r\in R$ is **nilpotent** if $r^n = 0$ for some $n \in \ZZ^{\geq 0}$.
:::


:::{.fact}
The binomial expansion works in any ring:
\[
(a+b)^n = \sum_{k\leq n} {n\choose k} a^k b^{n-k}
.\]

This is useful when considering nilpotents or radicals.
:::


:::{.exercise title="?"}
\envlist
Notation: let $N$ or $N(R)$ be the set of nilpotents in $R$.
Let $ZD$ or $ZD(R)$ be the set of zero divisors.
Let $U, U(R), R\units$ be the units of $R$.

- Show that every nilpotent is either zero or a zero divisor.
  - Solution: $a^m=0$ with $a\neq 0$ and $m>1$, then $x x^{m-1} = 0$, so $x^{m-1}$ is a nontrivial element annihilating $x$.
- Show that $R$ commutative and unital and $x$ nilpotent implies $1+x$ is a unit, and moreover $N + R\units = R\units$ (the sum of a nilpotent and unit is a unit).
  - Solution: expand $1/(1+x) = \sum_{k=0}^\infty (-x)^k = \sum_{k=0}^n (-x)^k \da f(x)$, so $(1+x)f(x) =1$.
  Now use that $RN = N$ since $x^n=0$ implies $(rx)^n = rxrx\cdots rx = r^n x^n = 0$.
  Taking $n + u\in N + R\units$, then $u+n = u\inv(1 + u\inv n) \in R\units R\units$ since $u\inv n\in N$ and $1+u\inv\in R\units$ by the first part.

- Show that $f(x) = \sum a_k x^k \in R[x]$ iff $f\in R[x]\units \iff a_0\in R\units, a_{k>1}\in N$.
  - Solution: use that if $a_k$ is nilpotent, $a_k x^k$ is nilpotent.
    Then $a_0$ a unit at $a_1 x$ nilpotent implies $a_0 + a_1 x$ is a unit, and inductively $f$ is a unit.
    If $f$ is a unit, take $fg=1$ with $f = \sum_{k=0}^na_k x^k$ and $g = \sum_{k=0}^m a_k x^k$.
    Write $fg(x) = \sum_{k=0}^{n+m} c_k x^k$ where $c_k = \sum_{j=0}^k a_j b_{k-j}$.
    Using $fg=1$, $c_{0} = a_0 b_0 = 1$ so $a_0, b_0$ are units, and proceed inductively by descending coefficients, checking that $a_n b_m$ is the $r=0$ case.

- Show that $f(x) \in N(R[x]) \iff a_k \in N(R)$ for all $k$.
  - Solution: $f$ nilpotent with $f(x) = \sum a_k x^k$ implies $f^m=0$, and check the leading term $a_n^m x^{nm}$.
    Induct down: $f, a_nx^n$ nilpotent implies $f - a_n x^n$ nilpotent.
    Conversely, if $a_i^{n_i} = 0$, use that $N(R) \normal R$ form an ideal.

- Show that $f\in ZD(R[x]) \iff f\neq 0$ and $rf(x) = 0$ for some $r\in R$.

:::


:::{.definition title="Nilradical"}
The **nilradical** of $R \in \CRing$ is
\[
\nilrad{R} \definedas \theset{x\in R \suchthat x \text{ is nilpotent}} = \rad{0}
.\]
:::

:::{.exercise title="Quotient by nilradical is reduced"}
Show $\nilrad{R} \normal R$ is an ideal and $A/\nilrad{R}$ is reduced.
:::

:::{.solution}
\envlist

- $R\nilrad{R} \subseteq R$:
  For $r$ nilpotent of order $n$ and $x\in R$, $xr$ is nilpotent since 
\[
(xr)^n = (xr)(xr)\cdots(xr) = x^n r^n = x^n 0 = 0
.\]

- $R^2 \subseteq R$, for $r,s\in \nilrad{R}$ write $r^{n} = s^m = 0$, then
\[
(r+s)^{N} = \sum_{k\geq 0}{N \choose k} r^k s^{N-k}
,\]
so just choose $N$ large enough so that either $k>n$ or $N-k> m$ always holds, e.g. $N\da n+m-1$.

- $R/\nilrad{R}$ has no nonzero nilpotents:
  Take $\bar{r} \in R/\nilrad{R}$ for some $r\in R$, then $\phi(r^n) = \phi(r)^n = \bar{r}^n$.
  So\[
\bar{r}^n=0 \mod \nilrad{R} \iff \bar{r^n} \equiv 0 \mod \nilrad{R} \iff r^n \in \nilrad{R} \iff r\in 0_R
  .\]

:::

:::{.exercise title="?"}
Show that the nilradical is the intersection of all prime ideals.

:::

:::{.solution}

> See A&M 1.8

Write $P$ as the intersection of all prime ideals of $R$.

$\nilrad{R} \subseteq P$:
Suppose $r\in \nilrad{R}$ so $r^n = 0$ and let $\mfp \in \spec R$.
Then use that $0\in I$ for any ideal: $r^n = 0 \in \mfp \implies r\in \mfp$ since $\mfp$ is prime.

$\nilrad{R}^c \subseteq P^c$:
Fix $f$ non-nilpotent, we want to show $f$ is not in any prime ideal.
set $S \subseteq R$ to be all ideals $I$ such that $f^{>0} \not \in I$.
Apply Zorn's lemma: $S\neq \emptyset$ since $0\in S$, so after ordering $I$ by inclusions $S$ contains a maximal $\mfp$ which we claim is prime.
If $a,b \in \mfp^c$ then $\mfp + \gens{ a }$ and $\mfp + \gens{b} supset \mfp$ strictly, and by maximality they aren't in $S$.
So there exist $m,n$ such that $f^m\in \mfp + \gens{ a }$ and $f^n \in \mfp + \gens{b}$. 
Then $f^{m+n} \in \mfp + \gens{ab}$, so $\mfp + \gens{ab}$ is not in $S$.
Thus $ab\not \in \mfp$ so $f\not\in \mfp$.
Letting $\mfp$ be arbitrary yields $f\not \in P$.
:::

:::{.exercise title="?"}
Show that $\nilrad{R} = \Intersect_{p\in \spec R} p$ is the intersection of all prime ideals $p\normal R$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Jacobson Radical"}
The **Jacobson radical** $\jacobsonrad{R}$ is the intersection of all maximal ideals, i.e.
\[  
\jacobsonrad{R} = \Intersect_{\mfm \in \mspec R} \mfm
.\]
:::

:::{.exercise title="?"}
Show $x\in \jacobsonrad{R} \iff 1-xR \subseteq R\units$.
:::

## Structure Theorems

:::{.definition title="Simple Modules"}
A module $M$ is **simple** iff every submodule $M' \leq M$ is either $0$ or $M$.
A ring \( R \) is simple if and only if it is simple as an \(R\dash\)module, i.e. there are no nontrivial proper ideals.
:::

:::{.definition title="Semisimple Modules"}
A module \( M \) is **simple** if and only if it admits a decomposition 
\[
M = \bigoplus_{j\in J} M_j
\]
with each \( M_j \) simple.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Krull"}
Every ring has a proper maximal ideal, and any proper ideal is contained in a maximal ideal.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Artin-Wedderburn?"}
If $R$ is a nonzero, unital, *semisimple* ring then 
\[
R \cong \bigoplus_{i=1}^m \mathrm{Mat}(n_i, D_i)
,\]
a finite sum of matrix rings over division rings.
:::

:::{.corollary}
If $M$ is a simple ring over $R$ a division ring, the $M$ is isomorphic to a matrix ring.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Wedderburn"}
Every finite division ring is a field, i.e. finite division rings must be commutative.
:::

## Zorn's Lemma

:::{.definition title="Chain in a poset"}
In a poset, a **chain** is a totally ordered subset.
An **upper bound** on a subset $S$ of a poset $X$ is any $x\in X$ such that $s\leq x$ for all $s\in S$.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Zorn's Lemma"}
If $P$ is a poset in which every chain has an upper bound, then $P$ has a maximal element.
:::

:::{.remark}
You can always form a subset poset, and restrict with any sub-collection thereof with a set predicate.
To use Zorn's lemma, you need to take an arbitrary chain in your poset $X$, produce an upper bound $U$ (e.g. by taking a union), and showing that $U$ is still in $X$ (i.e. it still satisfies the right predicate).
:::

:::{.proposition title="Existence of maximal ideals"}
Every proper ideal is contained in a maximal ideal.
:::

:::{.proof}
Let $0 < I < R$ be a proper ideal, and consider the set
$$
S = \theset{J \suchthat I   \subseteq J < R}
.$$

Note $I\in S$, so $S$ is nonempty.
The claim is that $S$ contains a maximal element $M$.

$S$ is a poset, ordered by set inclusion, so if we can show that every chain has an upper bound, we can apply Zorn's lemma to produce $M$.

Let $C \subseteq S$ be a chain in $S$, so $C = \theset{C_1 \subseteq C_2 \subseteq \cdots}$ and define $\hat{C} = \union_i C_i$.

**$\hat{C}$ is an upper bound for $C$:**
This follows because every $C_i \subseteq \hat{C}$.

**$\hat{C}$ is in $S$:**
Use the fact that $I \subseteq C_i < R$ for every $C_i$ and since no $C_i$ contains a unit, $\hat{C}$ doesn't contain a unit, and is thus proper.
:::

:::{.exercise title="?"}
Show that every non-unit of $R$ is contained in a maximal ideal.
:::

:::{.solution}
This follows because if $x\in R\sm R\units$, then $Rx \normal R$ and $Rx\neq R$ implies $R/Rx \neq 0$.
Then there exists some $\bar \mfm \in \mspec R/Rx$, and by the correspondence theorem this lifts to some $\mfm \in \mspec R$ containing $Rx$.
:::

## Unsorted

:::{.fact}
Division algorithm for Euclidean domains.

\todo[inline]{todo}

:::

:::{.definition title="Field of fractions"}
For $R\in \CRing$ an integral domain, the **field of fractions** of $R$ can be constructed as 
\[
\ff(R) \da \qty{R \cross R\nonzero}/\sim && (a,s)\sim bt \iff at-bs = 0_R
.\]

> Checking transitivity requires having no nonzero zero divisors.

:::

:::{.definition title="Localization"}
For $R\in \CRing$ and $S \subseteq R$ a *multiplicatively closed* subset, so $RS \subseteq S$ and $1_R\in S$, the **localization of $R$ at $S$** can be constructed as
\[
R\localize{S} \da \qty{R\cross S} / \sim && (a, s)\sim (b, t) \iff \exists u\in S\quad (at-bs)u = 0_R
.\]

> Why the $u$: use in proof of transitivity.

:::

\todo[inline]{Universal property.}

:::{.warnings}
There is a canonical ring morphism
\[
R &\to R\localize{S} \\
x &\mapsto {x\over 1}
,\]
but this may not be injective.
:::

:::{.remark}
For integral domains $R$, 
\[
\ff(R) \cong R\localize{ (R\nonzero) }
.\]

:::

:::{.theorem title="Hilbert Basis Theorem"}
\todo[inline]{todo}

:::

:::{.definition title="Primary Ideal"}
An ideal $I\normal R$ is **primary** iff whenever $pq\in I$, $p\in I$ and $q^n\in I$ for some $n$.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Polynomial rings over UFDs are UFDs"}
\todo[inline]{todo}


:::


:::{.exercise title="?"}
\envlist

- Show that in a PID, every element can be written as a finite product of irreducibles.
- Show that in a PID, every maximal ideal is generated by an *irreducible* element.
- Show that any PID is Noetherian.
- Show that not $\ZZ$ is Noetherian but not Artinian.
  - Hint: take a chain $n\ZZ \contains n^2\ZZ \contains \cdots$.
:::

:::{.exercise title="?"}
Show that $R[x]$ a PID $\iff R$ is a field.
:::

:::{.solution}
Hint: take $r\in R$, then $\gens{r, x} = \gens{f}$ for some $f$.
Write $r = fp$ and $x = fq$ for $p, q\in R[x]$, show $\deg f = 0$ and $\deg q = 1$.
Write $f = c$ a constant, $q(x) = ax + b$ to get $c(ax+b)=x \implies ca=1 \implies c\in R\units \implies \gens{f} = R[x]$.
Conclude by writing $1= ar_1(x) + xr_2(x)$, evaluate at $x=0$ to get $a\inv = r_1(0)$.
:::



