# Fields

Let $k$ denote a field.


:::{.fact}
\envlist
- The characteristic of any field $k$ is either 0 or $p$ a prime.
- All fields are simple rings (no proper nontrivial ideals).
- If $L/k$ is algebraic, then $\min(\alpha, L)$ divides $\min(\alpha, k)$.
- Every field morphism is either zero or injective.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Finite Extensions are Algebraic"}
Every finite extension is algebraic.
:::

:::{.proof}
If \( K/F \) and \( [K:F] = n \), then pick any \( \alpha \in K \) and consider \( 1, \alpha , \alpha ^2, ...  \).
This yields \( n+1 \) elements in an \( n\dash \)dimensional vector space, and thus there is a linear dependence \[
f(\alpha ) \da \sum_{j=1}^n c_j \alpha ^j = 0
.\]
But then \( \alpha \) is the root of the polynomial \( f \).
:::

:::{.theorem title="Gauss' Lemma"}
Let $R$ be a UFD and $F$ its field of fractions.
Then a primitive $p\in R[x]$ is irreducible in $R[x] \iff p$ is irreducible in $F[x]$.
:::

:::{.corollary}
A primitive polynomial $p\in \QQ[x]$ is irreducible $\iff p$ is irreducible in $\ZZ[x]$.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Eisenstein's Criterion"}
If $f(x) = \sum_{i=0}^n \alpha_i x^i \in \QQ[x]$ and $\exists p$ such that

- $p$ divides every coefficient *except* $a_n$ and
- $p^2$ does not divide $a_0$,

then $f$ is irreducible over $\QQ[x]$, and by Gauss' lemma, over $\ZZ[x]$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Primitive Extension"}
For $R$ a UFD, a polynomial $p\in R[x]$ is **primitive** iff the greatest common divisors of its coefficients is a unit.
:::


## Finite Fields

:::{.definition title="Prime Subfield"}
The **prime subfield** of a field $F$ is the subfield generated by $1$.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Characterization of Prime Subfields"}
The prime subfield of any field is isomorphic to either $\QQ$ or $\FF_p$ for some $p$.
:::

:::{.proposition}
If $\ch k = p$ then $(a+b)^p = a^p + b^p$ and $(ab)^p = a^p b^p$.
:::

:::{.proof}
Todo
:::
\todo{Proof}

:::{.theorem title="Construction of Finite Fields"}
$\GF(p^n)\cong \frac{\FF_p}{(f)}$ where $f \in \FF_p[x]$ is any irreducible of degree $n$, and $\GF(p^n) \cong \FF[\alpha] \cong \spanof_\FF\theset{1, \alpha, \cdots, \alpha^{n-1}}$ for any root $\alpha$ of $f$.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Prime Subfields of Finite Fields"}
Every finite field $F$ is isomorphic to a unique field of the form $\GF(p^n)$ and if $\ch F = p$, it has prime subfield $\FF_p$.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Containment of Finite Fields"}
$\GF(p^\ell) \leq \GF(p^k) \iff \ell$ divides $k$.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Identification of Finite Fields as Splitting Fields"}
$\GF(p^n)$ is the splitting field of $\rho(x) = x^{p^n} - x$, and the elements are exactly the roots of $\rho$.
:::

:::{.proof}
Todo.
Every element is a root by Cauchy's theorem, and the $p^n$ roots are distinct since its derivative is identically $-1$.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Splits Product of Irreducibles"}
Let $\rho_n \definedas x^{p^n} - x$.
Then $f(x) \divides \rho_n(x) \iff \deg f \divides n$ and $f$ is irreducible.
:::

:::{.corollary}
$x^{p^n} - x = \prod f_i(x)$ over all irreducible monic $f_i \in \FF_p[x]$ of degree $d$ dividing $n$.
:::

:::{.proof}
$\impliedby$:
Suppose $f$ is irreducible of degree $d$.
Then $f \divides x^{p^d} - x$ (consider $F[x]/\gens{f}$) and $x^{p^d} - x \divides x^{p^n} - x \iff d\divides n$.

$\implies$:

- $\alpha \in \GF(p^n) \iff \alpha^{p^n} - \alpha = 0$, so every element is a root of $\phi_n$ and $\deg \min(\alpha, \FF_p) \divides n$ since $\FF_p(\alpha)$ is an intermediate extension.

- So if $f$ is an irreducible factor of $\phi_n$, $f$ is the minimal polynomial of some root $\alpha$ of $\phi_n$, so $\deg f \divides n$.
$\phi_n'(x) = p^nx^{p^{n-1}} \neq 0$, so $\phi_n$ has distinct roots and thus no repeated factors. So $\phi_n$ is the product of all such irreducible $f$.
:::

:::{.proposition}
No finite field is algebraically closed.
:::

:::{.proof}
Todo
:::
\todo{Proof}

## Galois Theory

:::{.definition title="Algebraic Field Extension"}
A field extension $L/k$ is **algebraic** iff every $\alpha \in L$ is the root of some polynomial $f\in k[x]$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Normal Field Extension"}
Let $L/k$ be a finite extension.
Then TFAE:

- $L/k$ is **normal**.

- Every irreducible $f\in k[x]$ that has one root in $L$ has *all* of its roots in $L$
  - i.e. every polynomial splits into linear factors

- Every embedding $\sigma: L \injects \bar{k}$ that is a lift of the identity on $k$ satisfies $\sigma(L) = L$.

- If $L$ is separable: $L$ is the splitting field of some irreducible $f\in k[x]$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Separable Field Extension"}
Let $L/k$ be a field extension, $\alpha \in L$ be arbitrary, and $f(x) \definedas\min(\alpha, k)$.
TFAE:

- $L/k$ is **separable**
- $f$ has no repeated factors/roots
- $\gcd(f, f') = 1$, i.e. $f$ is coprime to its derivative
- $f' \not\equiv 0$
:::

:::{.proposition}
If $\ch k = 0$ or $k$ is finite, then every *algebraic* extension $L/k$ is separable.
:::

:::{.definition title="Field Automorphisms"}
\[ 
\Aut(L/k) = \theset{\sigma: L \to L \suchthat \restrictionof{\sigma}{k} = \id_k}
.\]
:::

:::{.proposition}
If $L/k$ is algebraic, then $\Aut(L/k)$ permutes the roots of irreducible polynomials.
:::

:::{.proposition}
$\abs{\aut(L/k)} \leq [L: k]$ with equality precisely when $L/k$ is normal.
:::

:::{.definition title="Galois Extension"}
An extension $L/K$ is *Galois* iff any of the following hold:

1. $[L: K] = \abs{\mathrm{Aut}(K/F)}$.
2. $L$ is the splitting field of a separable polynomial $p\in K[x]$.
3. The field fixed by $\mathrm{Aut}(K/F)$ is exactly $L$.
4. $L$ is finite, normal, and separable.
:::


:::{.definition title="Galois Group"}
If $L/k$ is Galois, we define $\Gal(L/k) \definedas \Aut(L/k)$.
:::

### Lemmas About Towers

Let $L/F/k$ be a finite tower of field extensions.


:::{.proposition title="Towers are multiplicative in degree"}
\[
[L : k] = [L: F][F: k]
.\]
:::


:::{.proposition title="Normal/Algebraic/Galois in towers"}
$L/k$ normal/algebraic/Galois $\implies L/F$ normal/algebraic/Galois.
:::


:::{.proof title="for normality"}
$\min(\alpha, F) \divides \min(\alpha, k)$, so if the latter splits in $L$ then so does the former.
:::


:::{.corollary title="?"}
$\alpha \in L$ algebraic over $k \implies \alpha$ algebraic over $F$.
:::


:::{.corollary title="?"}
$E_1/k$ normal and $E_2/k$ normal $\implies E_1E_2/k$ normal and $E_1 \intersect E_2 / k$ normal.


:::


:::{.proposition title="?"}
$F/k$ algebraic and $L/F$ algebraic $\implies L/k$ algebraic.
\begin{tikzcd}
L \arrow[d, bend right=49, "\text{alg}"'] 
  \arrow[dd, dashed, bend left=49, "\text{alg}"] \\
F \arrow[d, bend right=49, "\text{alg}"']                                  \\
k
\end{tikzcd}
:::


:::{.proposition title="?"}
If $L/k$ is algebraic, then $F/k$ separable and $L/F$ separable $\iff L/k$ separable
\begin{tikzcd}
L \arrow[d, dotted, bend right=49] \arrow[dd, bend left=49] \\
F \arrow[d, bend right=49]                                  \\
k
\end{tikzcd}

:::


\begin{tikzcd}
L \arrow[d, dotted, bend right=49] \arrow[dd, bend left=49] \\
F                                                           \\
k
\end{tikzcd}



- $F/k$ Galois and $L/K$ Galois $\implies F/k$  Galois **only if** $\Gal(L/F) \normal \Gal(L/k)$
  - $\implies \Gal(F/k) \cong \frac{\Gal(L/k)}{\Gal(L/F)}$


**Common Counterexamples**:

- $\QQ(\zeta_3, 2^{1/3})$ is normal but $\QQ(2^{1/3})$ is not since the irreducible polynomial $x^3 - 2$ has only one root in it.

:::{.definition title="Characterizations of Galois Extensions"}
Let $L/k$ be a finite field extension.
TFAE:

- $L/k$ is **Galois**
- $L/k$ is finite, normal, and separable.
- $L/k$ is the splitting field of a separable polynomial
- $\abs{\Aut(L/k)} = [L: k]$
- The fixed field of $\mathrm{Aut}(L/k)$ is exactly $k$.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory"}
Let $L/k$ be a Galois extension, then there is a correspondence:
\[
\correspond{\text{Subgroups } H \leq \Gal(L/k)}
&\iff
\correspond{\text{Fields }  F \text{ such}\\ \text{that } L/F/k} \\
H &\rightarrow \correspond{E^H \definedas ~\text{The fixed field of $H$}} \\
\correspond{\Gal(L/F) \definedas \theset{ \sigma \in \Gal(L/k) \suchthat \sigma(F) = F}} &\leftarrow F
\]

- This is contravariant with respect to subgroups/subfields.

- $[F: k] = [G: H]$, so degrees of extensions over the base field correspond to indices of subgroups.

- $[K : F] = \abs{H}$

- $L/F$ is Galois and $Gal(K/F) = H$

- $F/k$ is Galois $\iff H$ is normal, and $\Gal(F/k) = \Gal(L/k)/H$.

- The compositum $F_1 F_2$ corresponds to $H_1 \intersect H_2$.

- The subfield $F_1 \intersect F_2$ corresponds to $H_1 H_2$.
:::


### Examples

1. $\Gal(\QQ(\zeta_n)/\QQ) \cong \ZZ/(n)\units$ and is generated by maps of the form $\zeta_n \mapsto \zeta_n^j$ where $(j, n) = 1$.

  I.e., the following map is an isomorphism:

  \[
  \ZZ/(n)\units &\to \Gal(\QQ(\zeta_n), \QQ) \\
  r \mod n &\mapsto (\phi_r: \zeta_n \mapsto \zeta_n^r )
  \]

2. $\Gal(\GF(p^n)/\FF_p) \cong \ZZ/(n)$, a cyclic group generated by powers of the Frobenius automorphism:
  \[
  \varphi_p: \GF(p^n) &\to \GF(p^n) \\
  x &\mapsto x^p
\]

:::{.proposition}
Every quadratic extension is Galois.
:::

:::{.proposition}
If $K$ is the splitting field of an irreducible polynomial of degree $n$, then $\Gal(K/\QQ) \leq S_n$ is a transitive subgroup.
:::

:::{.corollary}
$n$ divides the order $\abs{ \Gal(K/\QQ)}$.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Characterization of Perfect Fields"}
TFAE:

- $k$ is a **perfect** field.

- Every irreducible polynomial $p\in k[x]$ is separable

- Every finite extension $F/k$ is separable.

- If $\ch k > 0$, the Frobenius is an automorphism of $k$.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Splitting + Perfect implies Galois"}
\hfill

- If $\ch k = 0$ or $k$ is finite, then $k$ is perfect.

- $k = \CC,\RR, \QQ, \FF_p$ are perfect, so any finite normal extension is Galois.

- Every splitting field of a polynomial over a perfect field is Galois.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Composite Extensions"}
If $F/k$ is finite and Galois and $L/k$ is arbitrary, then $FL/L$ is Galois and
\[
\Gal(FL/L) = \Gal(F / F\intersect L) \subset \Gal(F/k)
.\]
:::

## Cyclotomic Polynomials

:::{.definition title="Cyclotomic Polynomials"}
Let $\zeta_n = e^{2\pi i/n}$, then the **$n$th cyclotomic polynomial** is given by
$$
\Phi_{n}(x)=\prod_{k=1 \atop (j, n)=1}^{n}\left(x- \zeta_n^k\right)
,$$

which is a product over primitive roots of unity.
It is the unique irreducible polynomial which is a divisor of $x^n - 1$ but *not* a divisor of $x^k-1$ for any $k<n$.
:::

:::{.proposition}
$\deg \Phi_n(x) = \phi(n)$ for $\phi$ the totient function.
:::

:::{.proof}
$\deg \Phi_n(x)$ is the number of $n$th primitive roots, which is the number of numbers less than and coprime to $n$.
:::

**Computing $\Phi_n$:**

1.
$$
\Phi_{n}(z)=\prod_{d | n, d>0}\left(z^{d}-1\right)^{\mu\left(\frac{n}{d}\right)}
$$
where
$$
\mu(n) \equiv\left\{ \begin{array}{ll}{0} & {\text { if } n \text { has one or more repeated prime factors }} \\ {1} & {\text { if } n=1} \\ {(-1)^{k}} & {\text { if } n \text { is a product of } k \text { distinct primes, }}\end{array}\right.
$$

2.
\[
x^{n}-1=\prod_{d | n} \Phi_{d}(x) \implies \Phi_n(x) = \frac{x^n-1}{\prod_{d | n \atop d < n} \Phi_{d}(x)},
\]
so just use polynomial long division.

:::{.proposition}
\[
\Phi_{p}(x)   &=  x^{p-1}+x^{p-2}+\cdots+x+1 \\
\Phi_{2 p}(x) &=  x^{p-1}-x^{p-2}+\cdots-x+1
\]
:::

:::{.proposition}
\[
k\divides n \implies \Phi_{n k}(x)=\Phi_{n}\left(x^{k}\right)
\]
:::

:::{.definition title="Simple Extension"}
An extension $F/k$ is **simple** if $F = k[\alpha]$ for a single element $\alpha$.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Primitive Element"}
Every finite separable extension is simple.
:::

:::{.corollary}
$\GF(p^n)$ is a simple extension over $\FF_p$.
:::
