# Field Theory

:::{.remark}
Galois is defined as **normal and separable**.
:::

## Basics: Polynomials

:::{.definition title="Reducible and Irreducible Polynomials"}
For $\FF$ a field, a polynomial $f\in \FF[x]$ is **reducible** if and only if $f$ can be factored as $f(x) = g(x) h(x)$ for some $g, h\in \FF[x]$ with $\deg g, \deg h \geq 1$ (so $g, h$ are nonconstant).
$f$ is **irreducible** if $f$ is not reducible.
:::

:::{.definition title="Primitive Polynomials"}
For $R$ a UFD, a polynomial $p\in R[x]$ is **primitive** iff the greatest common divisors of its coefficients is a unit.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Eisenstein's Criterion"}
If $f(x) = \sum_{i=0}^n \alpha_i x^i \in \QQ[x]$ and $\exists p$ such that

- $p$ divides every coefficient *except* $a_n$ and
- $p^2$ does not divide $a_0$,

then $f$ is irreducible over $\QQ[x]$, and by Gauss' lemma, over $\ZZ[x]$.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Gauss' Lemma"}
Let $R$ be a UFD and $F$ its field of fractions.
Then a primitive $p\in R[x]$ is irreducible in $R[x] \iff p$ is irreducible in $F[x]$.
:::

:::{.corollary}
A primitive polynomial $p\in \QQ[x]$ is irreducible $\iff p$ is irreducible in $\ZZ[x]$.
:::

## Definitions

:::{.definition title="Characteristic"}
The **characteristic** of a ring $R$ is the smallest integer $p$ such that $\sum_{k=1}^p 1 = 0$.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Freshman's Dream"}
If $\ch k = p$ then $(a+b)^p = a^p + b^p$ and $(ab)^p = a^p b^p$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Fixed Field"}
For $H \leq \Aut_{\Fieldsover{k}}(L)$,
\[
L^H \da \ts{ \ell \in L \st  \sigma(l) = \ell }
.\]

:::

:::{.definition title="Prime Subfield"}
The **prime subfield** of a field $F$ is the subfield generated by $1$.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Characterization of Prime Subfields"}
The prime subfield of any field is isomorphic to either $\QQ$ or $\FF_p$ for some $p$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Field Automorphisms"}
\[ 
\Aut(L/k) = \theset{\sigma: L \to L \suchthat \restrictionof{\sigma}{k} = \id_k}
.\]

:::

:::{.definition title="Embeddings and Lifts"}
Let $k$ denote a field, and $L/k$ extension.
Every field morphism is an embedding (injection).
An **embedding** of $k\dash$algebras $L\embeds L'$ will refer to any ring morphism over $k$, i.e. a field morphism that restricts to the identity on $k$:


\begin{tikzcd}
	L && {L'} \\
	\\
	& k
	\arrow[hook', from=3-2, to=1-1]
	\arrow[hook, from=3-2, to=1-3]
	\arrow[hook, from=1-1, to=1-3]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsMyxbMCwwLCJMIl0sWzIsMCwiTCciXSxbMSwyLCJrIl0sWzIsMCwiIiwwLHsic3R5bGUiOnsidGFpbCI6eyJuYW1lIjoiaG9vayIsInNpZGUiOiJib3R0b20ifX19XSxbMiwxLCIiLDIseyJzdHlsZSI6eyJ0YWlsIjp7Im5hbWUiOiJob29rIiwic2lkZSI6InRvcCJ9fX1dLFswLDEsIiIsMCx7InN0eWxlIjp7InRhaWwiOnsibmFtZSI6Imhvb2siLCJzaWRlIjoidG9wIn19fV1d)

More generally, we can ask for lifts of any map $\sigma: k\to k'$:

\begin{tikzcd}
	L && {L'} \\
	\\
	k && {k'}
	\arrow[""{name=0, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, hook, from=1-1, to=1-3]
	\arrow[""{name=1, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "\sigma", hook, from=3-1, to=3-3]
	\arrow[hook, from=3-1, to=1-1]
	\arrow[hook, from=3-3, to=1-3]
	\arrow[shorten <=9pt, shorten >=9pt, Rightarrow, from=1, to=0]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJMIl0sWzIsMCwiTCciXSxbMCwyLCJrIl0sWzIsMiwia19cXHNpZ21hIl0sWzAsMSwiIiwwLHsic3R5bGUiOnsidGFpbCI6eyJuYW1lIjoiaG9vayIsInNpZGUiOiJ0b3AifX19XSxbMiwzLCJcXHNpZ21hIiwwLHsic3R5bGUiOnsidGFpbCI6eyJuYW1lIjoiaG9vayIsInNpZGUiOiJ0b3AifX19XSxbMiwwLCIiLDEseyJzdHlsZSI6eyJ0YWlsIjp7Im5hbWUiOiJob29rIiwic2lkZSI6InRvcCJ9fX1dLFszLDEsIiIsMSx7InN0eWxlIjp7InRhaWwiOnsibmFtZSI6Imhvb2siLCJzaWRlIjoidG9wIn19fV0sWzUsNCwiIiwwLHsic2hvcnRlbiI6eyJzb3VyY2UiOjIwLCJ0YXJnZXQiOjIwfX1dXQ==)

Most often, we'll take $\sigma: k\to k$ to be the identity.

:::

:::{.definition title="Perfect Fields"}
The following are equivalent:

- $k$ is a **perfect** field.

- If $\ch k > 0$, the Frobenius is an automorphism of $k$, so $k^p = k$.

- Every finite extension $F/k$ is separable.

- Every irreducible polynomial $p\in k[x]$ is separable.

:::

:::{.example title="of a non-perfect field"}
Example of a non-perfect field: $\FF_p(t)$.
Use that $f(x) \da x^p - t$ is irreducible in $\FF_p(t)[x]$ but not separable.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Characterization of perfect fields"}
$k$ is perfect (using the irreducible implies separable condition) if either 

- $\ch k = 0$ or 
- $\ch k = p > 0$ and $k^p = k$.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
For $\ch k = 0$, use that irreducible implies separable.

For $\ch k = p$, show that $k_p\neq k \iff$ irreducible does *not* imply separable, so there exists an inseparable irreducible.

- Supposing $k^p\neq k$, choose $a\in k$ not a $p$th power.
- Note that $f(x) \da x^p-a$ has only one root in $\bar{k}$: in a splitting field, any root $r$ satisfies $r^p=a$, so 
\[
x^p - a = x^p - r^p = (x-r)^p
.\]

- Note $f$ is irreducible: its only possible divisors are $(x-r)^m$ for $m \leq p$.
  Expanding yields 
  \[
(x-r)^m = \sum_{k=0}^m {m\choose k} x^{m-k} (-r)^{k} = x^m + {m\choose 1} x^{m-1} (-r)^m + \cdots
  ,\]
  so the coefficient of $x^{m-1}$ is $-mr \in k$.

- Thus if $(x-r)^m$ has a nontrivial divisor in $k[x]$ then $m$ must be in $k\units$, forcing $r\in k$.
  But then $r^p = a\in k$, $\contradiction$.

:::

:::{.remark title="Numerical Invariants"}
Let $K/k$ be an extension.

\[
[K: k] = \dim_{\Vect_k} K
\] 
is the dimension of $K$ as a $k\dash$vector space.
Automorphisms of fields over $K$ are defined as

\[ 
\Aut_{\Fieldsover{k}}(K) \da \Aut(K/k) \da \ts{ \sigma: K \to K' \st \ro{\sigma}{k} = \id_k } 
, \] 
so lifts of the identity on $k$, and 
\[
\ts{K:k} \da \# \Aut(K/k)
.\]

If $K/k$ is finite, normal, and separable,
\[
\Gal(K/k) \da \Aut(K/k)
,\]
where in general
\[
\ts{K: k} \leq [K: k]
\]
with equality when $L/k$ is Galois.

:::


### Extensions

:::{.definition title="Simple Extensions"}
An extension $L/k$ is **simple** iff $L = K( \alpha)$ for some \( \alpha\in L \).
:::

:::{.definition title="Algebraic Extension"}
A field extension $L/k$ is **algebraic** iff every $\alpha \in L$ is the root of some polynomial $f\in k[x]$.
:::

## Extensions

### Distinguished Classes

> See <http://math.wsu.edu/students/jstreipel/notes/galoistheory.pdf>

:::{.definition title="Distinguished Classes"}
A collection of field extensions $\mathcal{S}$ is **distinguished** iff

1. (Transitive property) For any tower $L/K/k$, the extension $L/k \in \mathcal{S} \iff L/K \in \mcs$ (upper transitivity) and $K/k\in \mathcal{S}$ (lower transitivity):

\begin{tikzcd}
	L &&&& L \\
	\\
	K && \iff && K \\
	\\
	k &&&& k
	\arrow[hook, from=5-1, to=3-1]
	\arrow[hook, from=3-1, to=1-1]
	\arrow[hook, from=5-5, to=3-5]
	\arrow[hook, from=3-5, to=1-5]
	\arrow[color={rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}, curve={height=18pt}, dashed, hook, from=5-1, to=1-1]
	\arrow[color={rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}, curve={height=18pt}, dashed, hook, from=5-5, to=3-5]
	\arrow[color={rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}, curve={height=18pt}, dashed, hook, from=3-5, to=1-5]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=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)

2. (Lifting property) Lifts of distinguished extensions are distinguished: $K/k\in \mathcal{S}$ and $L/k$ any extension $\implies LK/L \in \mathcal{S}$:

\begin{tikzcd}
	& LK \\
	L && K \\
	& k
	\arrow[draw={rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}, dashed, hook, from=3-2, to=2-3]
	\arrow[hook', from=3-2, to=2-1]
	\arrow["\therefore", draw={rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}, dashed, hook, from=2-1, to=1-2]
	\arrow[hook, from=2-3, to=1-2]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=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)


3. (Compositing property)
Whenever $L/k, K/k\in \mcs$, the amalgam $KL/k \in \mcs$ as well:

\begin{tikzcd}
	& LK \\
	L && K \\
	& k
	\arrow[draw={rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}, hook, from=3-2, to=2-3]
	\arrow[draw={rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}, hook', from=3-2, to=2-1]
	\arrow[draw={rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}, hook, from=2-1, to=1-2]
	\arrow[hook, from=2-3, to=1-2]
	\arrow["\therefore", color={rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}, dashed, from=3-2, to=1-2]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=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)


> Supposed to think of $LK/L$ as a lift of $K/k$.

:::

:::{.example title="of distinguished classes"}
The following classes of extensions are distinguished:

- Algebraic.
- Finite.
- Separable.
- Purely inseparable.
- Finitely generated.
- Solvable.
:::

:::{.fact title="Normal/Algebraic/Galois extensions are upper transitive"}

For $L/F/k$: $L/k$ normal/algebraic/Galois $\implies L/F$ normal/algebraic/Galois.
:::

### Normal Extensions

:::{.definition title="Normal Field Extension"}
Let $L/k$ be an extension.
Then TFAE:

- $L/k$ is **normal**.

- Every irreducible polynomial $f\in k[x]$ that has one root in $L$ has *all* of its roots in $L$, and thus splits in $L[x]$.
  - So if $\alpha\in L$ then every Galois conjugate $\alpha_k \in L$ as well..
   Thus either $f$ splits in $L$ or $f$ has no roots in $L$.

:::

:::{.proposition title="Characterization of normal algebraic extensions"}
If $L/k$ s algebraic, then $L/k$ is normal iff every embedding $\sigma: L \injects \bar{k}$ lifting the identity on $k$ satisfies $\sigma(L) = L$, so $\sigma$ is an automorphism of $L$ fixing $k$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Normal Closure"}
If $K/k$ is algebraic, then there is an extension $N_k/K$ such that $N_k/k$ is normal and $N_k/K/k$ is a tower.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Characterization of finite normal extensions as splitting fields"}
An extension $L/k$ is finite and normal $\iff L$ is the splitting field of some polynomial $f\in k[x]$.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
$\implies$:

- Write $L = k(a_1, \cdots, a_n)$ by finiteness.
- Let $m_i$ be the minimal polynomials of the $a_i$.
- By normality, the $m_i$ split in $L[x]$.
- Then $L$ is the splitting field of $f(x) \da \prod_i m_i(x)$.

$\impliedby$:

- Suppose $L/k = \SF(f)$, and pick any monic $m\in L[x]^{\irr}$ with a root $a\in L$, so that $m$ is the minimal polynomial of $a$.
- Toward showing $m$ splits in $L$: let $M = \SF(m)$, we'll show $M=L$.
- To show that for any root $b\in M$ we have $b\in L$, it suffices to show $[L(b): L] = 1$.

  The strategy: use that $[L(a):L] = 1$ since $a\in L$ by assumption, and try to relate the two degrees.

- We have $L/k$, and a number of towers to work with:
\[
[L(a):k] &= [L(a): k(a)] [k(a): k] &= [L(a) : L] [L: k] \\ \\
[L(b):k] &= [L(b): k(b)] [k(b): k] &= [L(b) : L] [L: k]
.\]

- In the first set of equalities, note that $k(a)\slice{k} \cong k(b)\slice{k}$ since $a,b$ are conjugate roots over $k$.
  Moreover $L(a)\slice{k(a)} \cong L(b) \slice{k(b)}$ since both are splitting fields for $f$.

- Thus $[L(a):k] = [L(b): k]$, which forces $[L(a): L] = [L(b): L]$ after dividing by $[L:k]$.
  But $[L(a): L] = 1$.

:::

:::{.example title="of normal extensions"}
\envlist

- Useful trick: if $[L: k] = 2$ then $L/k$ is automatically normal.

- Useful trick: if $L/K/k$, then $K/k$ is normal iff $\Gal(L/K) \normal \Gal(L/k)$.

- $K \da \QQ(2^{1\over 3})$ is not normal, since $K\subset \RR$ but $(x^3-2) = \prod_k x-\zeta_3^k 2^{1\over 3}$ with $\zeta_3, \zeta_3^2 \in \CC$.
  - Another reason: an embedding $\sigma: K\to \bar k$ can send $2^{1\over 3}$ to any other root of $x^3-2$.

- $\QQ(\sqrt 2, \sqrt 3)$ is normal over $\QQ$, since it it is finite and splits $f(x) \da (x^2-2)(x^2-3)$, which is a separable polynomial.

- $L \da \QQ(2^{1\over 4})$ is not normal, since it is finite but not the splitting field of any polynomial.

- $\QQ(\zeta_k)$ is normal for $\zeta_k$ any primitive $k$th root of unity.


- A normal non-separable extension: $\FF_p(x, y) \slice{\FF_p (x^p, y^p)}$.
  This has finite degree $p^2$ but infinitely many subfields?

:::

:::{.corollary title="?"}
$E_1/k$ normal and $E_2/k$ normal $\implies E_1E_2/k$ normal and $E_1 \intersect E_2 / k$ normal.



\begin{tikzcd}
	&& {E_1 E_2} \\
	\\
	{E_1} &&&& {E_2} \\
	&& {E_1 \cap E_2} \\
	\\
	\\
	&& {k}
	\arrow["{\text{normal}}", from=3-5, to=7-3]
	\arrow[from=4-3, to=7-3, dashed, no head, "\text{normal}", near start]
	\arrow["{\text{normal}}"', from=3-1, to=7-3]
	\arrow[from=1-3, to=3-1, no head]
	\arrow[from=1-3, to=3-5, no head]
	\arrow[from=1-3, to=4-3, no head]
	\arrow[from=1-3, to=7-3, curve={height=25pt}, dashed, no head, "\text{normal}"', near start]
	\arrow[from=3-1, to=4-3, no head]
	\arrow[from=4-3, to=3-5, no head]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNSxbMiwwLCJFXzEgRV8yIl0sWzAsMiwiRV8xIl0sWzQsMiwiRV8yIl0sWzIsMywiRV8xIFxcY2FwIEVfMiJdLFsyLDYsImsiXSxbMiw0LCJcXHRleHR7bm9ybWFsfSJdLFszLDQsIiIsMix7InN0eWxlIjp7ImJvZHkiOnsibmFtZSI6ImRhc2hlZCJ9LCJoZWFkIjp7Im5hbWUiOiJub25lIn19fV0sWzEsNCwiXFx0ZXh0e25vcm1hbH0iLDJdLFswLDEsIiIsMSx7InN0eWxlIjp7ImhlYWQiOnsibmFtZSI6Im5vbmUifX19XSxbMCwyLCIiLDEseyJzdHlsZSI6eyJoZWFkIjp7Im5hbWUiOiJub25lIn19fV0sWzAsMywiIiwxLHsic3R5bGUiOnsiaGVhZCI6eyJuYW1lIjoibm9uZSJ9fX1dLFswLDQsIiIsMSx7ImN1cnZlIjozLCJzdHlsZSI6eyJib2R5Ijp7Im5hbWUiOiJkYXNoZWQifSwiaGVhZCI6eyJuYW1lIjoibm9uZSJ9fX1dLFsxLDMsIiIsMSx7InN0eWxlIjp7ImhlYWQiOnsibmFtZSI6Im5vbmUifX19XSxbMywyLCIiLDEseyJzdHlsZSI6eyJoZWFkIjp7Im5hbWUiOiJub25lIn19fV1d)

:::

:::{.proposition}
$\abs{\aut(L/k)} \leq [L: k]$ with equality precisely when $L/k$ is normal.
:::

### Issues with Normal Towers

:::{.warnings}
Normal extensions are *not* distinguished, since they fail the forward implication for (lower) transitivity.
However, they do have the (forward implication) upper transitive, lifting, and compositing properties.
:::

:::{.example title="Normal extensions are not transitive: failure of lower transitivity, forward implication"}
One can similarly produce towers where the total extension is normal but the lower iterate is not normal: take
\[
L/K/k \da \QQ(2^{1\over 3}, \zeta_3) / \QQ(2^{1\over 3}) / \QQ
.\]
Now $K/k$ isn't normal, since $\Gal(L/k) = S_3$ but $\Gal(L/K) = \ZZ/2 \not\normal S_3$.

Another example: let $L/k$ be any algebraic extension that isn't normal, and take $N_k$ to be the normal closure to get $N_k/L$. 
Concretely, $N_\QQ / \QQ(2^{1\over 3})/\QQ$ works.
:::

:::{.example title="Normal extensions are not transitive: failure of reverse implication"}
One can produce towers of successively normal extensions whose total extension is not normal in a cheap way:
take 
\[
L/K/k \da \QQ(2^{1\over 4}) / \QQ(2^{1\over 2}) / \QQ
.\]
Each iterate is normal since it's quadratic, but the overall extension misses complex roots and is thus not normal.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Normal extensions are upper transitive, forward implication (finite case)"}
For $L/k$ finite,

\begin{tikzcd}
	L &&&& L \\
	\\
	K && \implies && K \\
	\\
	k &&&& k
	\arrow[from=3-1, to=1-1]
	\arrow[from=5-1, to=3-1]
	\arrow["{\text{Normal}}"', color={rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}, curve={height=24pt}, dashed, from=5-1, to=1-1]
	\arrow[from=5-5, to=3-5]
	\arrow[from=3-5, to=1-5]
	\arrow["{\text{Normal}}"', color={rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}, curve={height=18pt}, dashed, from=3-5, to=1-5]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNyxbMCwwLCJMIl0sWzAsMiwiSyJdLFswLDQsImsiXSxbMiwyLCJcXGltcGxpZXMiXSxbNCwwLCJMIl0sWzQsMiwiSyJdLFs0LDQsImsiXSxbMSwwXSxbMiwxXSxbMiwwLCJcXHRleHR7Tm9ybWFsfSIsMix7ImN1cnZlIjo0LCJjb2xvdXIiOlswLDYwLDYwXSwic3R5bGUiOnsiYm9keSI6eyJuYW1lIjoiZGFzaGVkIn19fSxbMCw2MCw2MCwxXV0sWzYsNV0sWzUsNF0sWzUsNCwiXFx0ZXh0e05vcm1hbH0iLDIseyJjdXJ2ZSI6MywiY29sb3VyIjpbMCw2MCw2MF0sInN0eWxlIjp7ImJvZHkiOnsibmFtZSI6ImRhc2hlZCJ9fX0sWzAsNjAsNjAsMV1dXQ==)

:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
\envlist

- Use the fact that for finite extensions, $L/k$ is normal and separable $\iff L$ is the splitting field of a separable polynomial $f\in k[x]$.
- Now regard $f$ as a polynomial in $K[x]$; then $L$ is still the splitting field of $f$ over $K$, done.

Alternatively,

- Let $\alpha\in L$ be a root of $f\in K[x]$ with $f$ irreducible, it suffices to show all roots of $f$ are in $L$.
- Let $m\in K[x]$ be the minimal polynomial of $\alpha$ over $K$, and let $m'\in k[x]$ be the minimal polynomial of $\alpha$ over $k$.
- Since $L/k$ is normal and $\alpha\in L$, $m'$ splits in $L$.
- Minimal polynomials are divisible in towers, so $m$ divides $m'$.
  Since $m'$ splits in $L$, so must $m$.

:::

:::{.proposition title="Normal extensions are upper transitive, forward implication (general case)"}
If $L/K/k$ with $L/k$ normal, then $L/K$ is normal.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
Use the embedding characterization, it suffices to show that every embedding $\sigma: $
Since $k \subseteq K$, any embedding $\sigma: K\injects \bar{k}$ over $\id_K$ is also an embedding over $\id_k$.
Since $L/k$ is normal, $\sigma(L) = L$ and $L/K$ is thus normal.
:::


### Separable Extensions

:::{.definition title="Separable polynomials"}
A polynomial $f \in k[x]$ is **separable** iff $f$ has no repeated roots.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Separability test: $\gcd$ with derivative"}
$f$ is separable iff $\gcd(f, f')=1$, so $f, f'$ share no common roots.
Moreover, the multiple roots of $f$ are precisely the roots of $\gcd(f, f')$.
:::

:::{.proof title="of separability test"}
$\not\implies$:
Suppose $f$ has a repeated root $r_i$, so its multiplicity is at least 2.
Then 
\[
f(x) = (x-r)^2 g(x) \implies f'(x) = 2(x-r)g(x) + (x-r)^2g'(x)
,\]
so $r$ is a root of $f'$.

$\not\impliedby$:
Suppose $r$ is a root of $f, f'$.
Write $f(x) = (x-r)p(x)$ and $f'(x) = (x-r)p'(x) + p(x)$.
Rearranging, $f'(x) - (x-r)p'(x) = p(x)$, and since $r$ is a root of the LHS it's a root of the RHS.
So $p(x) = (x-r) q(x)$ and $f(x) = (x-r)^2 q(x)$, making $r$ a repeated root.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Separability test: identically zero derivative"}
$f\in k[x]^{\irr}$ is **inseparable** (so $f$ has a repeated root) iff $f'(x) \equiv 0$.
:::

:::{.proof title="of separability test"}
Assume $f$ is monic, then $f$ is inseparable iff $f, f'$ have a common root $a$.
So $(x-a)\divides q\da \gcd(f, f')$, and since $f$ is irreducible, it must be the minimal polynomial of $a$.
Since $f'(a) = 0$, this forces $f'\divides f$, and since $\deg f' = \deg f - 1 < \deg f$ this forces $f' \equiv 0$.
:::

:::{.example title="of separable and inseparable polynomials"}
\envlist

- $x^2-2$ is separable over $\QQ$, but inseparable over $\FF_2$.
- $(x^2-2)^2$ is inseparable over $\QQ$
- $x^2-t$ is inseparable over $\FF_2(t)$.
- $f(x) \da x^{p^n}-x$ is separable over $\FF_p$, since $f'(x) = -1$ has no roots at all.
- $f(x) \da x^n-1$ is inseparable over $\FF_p$ when $p\divides n$.
  Otherwise, $f' = nx^{n-1}$ has only $x=0$ as roots, whereas $0$ is not a root of $f$, so $f$ is separable.
- If $\ch k=0$, then irreducible $\implies$ separable.

:::

:::{.corollary title="Inseparable iff polynomial in characteristic powers"}
If $f\in k[x]^{\irr}$ and $p\da \ch k > 0$, then $f$ inseparable $\iff f(x) = q(x^{p^n})$ for some unique $n$.
:::

:::{.proof title="of inseparable characterization"}
$\implies$:

Use that $f$ is inseparable iff $f' \equiv 0$.
The claim is that $f' \equiv 0$ in characteristic $p$ iff all exponents present in $f$ are divisible by $p$.
If $f'\equiv 0$, write
\[
f(x) &= a_nx^n + a_{n-1} x^{n-1} + \cdots + a_1 x + a_0 \\
\implies f'(x) &= na_nx^{n-1} + (n-1)a_{n-1}x^{n-2} + \cdots + a_1 \\
&\equiv 0
,\]
which forces $i a_i = 0$ for all $i$.
For any $a_i\neq 0$, this forces $i\equiv 0 \mod p$, so $a_i$ can only be nonzero when $p\divides i$, so $i=kp$ for some $k$.
So reindex to write
\[
f(x) = a_0 + a_1x^p + a_2x^{2p} + \cdots + a_n x^{np} = \qty{b_0 + b_1 x + b_2 x^{2} + \cdots + b_nx^{n}}^p \in \bar{k}[x]
,\]
using $(c+d)^p = c^p + d^p$ in characteristic $p$, and taking $b_i \da a_i^{1\over p} \in \bar{k}$
So $f' \equiv 0\implies f(x) = q(x^p)$ where $q(t) \da \sum b_i t^i$.

$\impliedby$:
If $f(x) = q(x^p)$ for some $q$, the previous calculation shows $q$ has multiple roots, thus so does $f$, so $f$ is inseparable.
:::

:::{.definition title="Separable Field Extension"}
Let $L/k$ be a field extension, $\alpha \in L$ be algebraic over $k$, and $f(x) \definedas\min(\alpha, k)$.
The following are equivalent 

- $L/k$ is a **separable** extension.
- Every element ${\alpha} \in L$ is separable over $k$, so $\alpha$ has separable minimal polynomial $m(x)$ in some splitting field of $m$.
- Every finite subextension $L'/k$ is separable.
:::

:::{.fact}
Every irreducible polynomial is separable in characteristic zero.

:::

:::{.proposition title="Simplifications of separability for finite extensions"}
If $L/k$ is a finite extension, then, TFAE:

- $L/k$ is separable.
- \( L = k( \alpha) \) for \( \alpha \)  a separable element.
- \( L = k( S ) \) for \( S \) some set of separable elements
- $[L: K] = [L:K]_s$, the separable degree.
\[
[L: k] = \ts{ L: k } \da \# \Aut_{\Fieldsover k}(L)
.\] 
:::


:::{.fact}
A finite extension of a perfect field is automatically separable, and one only needs to show normality to show it's Galois.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Separable splitting fields are Galois"}
If $L/k$ is separable, then
\[
[L: k] = \ts{ L: k } 
.\]
If $L/k$ is a splitting field, then
\[
[L:K] = \# \Aut_{\Fieldsover{k}}(L) \da \# \Gal(L/k)
.\]

:::

:::{.proposition title="Irreducible polynomials have separable splitting fields"}
Irreducible polynomials have distinct roots after passing to a splitting field.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Algebraic extensions of perfect fields are separable"}
If $\ch k = 0$ or $k$ is finite, then every *algebraic* extension $L/k$ is separable.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Irreducible implies separable for perfect fields"}
If $k$ is a perfect field, then every irreducible $f\in k[x]^{\irr}$ is automatically separable.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
If $\ch k = 0$ and $f$ is irreducible, then since $\deg f' < \deg f$ and $f$ is irreducible we must have $\gcd(f, f')=1$ and $f$ is separable.

If $\ch k = p>0$, then if $f$ is irreducible and inseparable then $f(x) = g(x^p)$ for some $g$.
Write $g(x) = \sum a_k x^k$, and since $k$ is perfect, write $b_k \da a_k^{1\over p}$, then
\[
f(x) = \sum a_k x^{pk} = \sum b_k^p x^{pk} = \qty{\sum b_k x^k}^p
,\]
so $f$ is reducible. $\contradiction$.

:::


:::{.proposition title="Separability is transitive."}
If $L/K/k$, then $L/K$ is separable and $K/k$ is separable $\iff$ $L/k$ is separable.
:::


:::{.proof title="?"}
$\impliedby$:

- By definition, every $\alpha \in L$ is separable over $k$.
- $K/k$ is separable:
  - Since $K \subseteq L$, any $\alpha \in K$ is also separable over $k$.
- $L/K$ is separable:
  - If $\alpha \in L$, then $\min_{\alpha, k}(x)$ is a separable polynomial over some splitting field.
  - Use that $L/k$ implies $\min_{\alpha, L}(x)$ divides $\min_{\alpha, k}(x)$, so the former is separable, done.

$\implies$:
A definition helps:

:::{.definition title="Separable degree"}
The **separable degree** of an extension $L/k$ is defined by fixing an embedding $\sigma: k\embeds \bar{k}$ (the algebraic or separable closure) and letting $[L:k]_s$ be the number of embeddings $\sigma':L\to \bar{k}$:

\begin{tikzcd}
	L && {\bar{k}} \\
	\\
	k && k
	\arrow["{\sigma'}", dashed, hook, from=1-1, to=1-3]
	\arrow[hook, from=3-1, to=1-1]
	\arrow["\sigma"', hook, from=3-3, to=1-3]
	\arrow[Rightarrow, no head, from=3-1, to=3-3]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNCxbMCwyLCJrIl0sWzIsMCwiXFxiYXJ7a30iXSxbMCwwLCJMIl0sWzIsMiwiayJdLFsyLDEsIlxcc2lnbWEnIiwwLHsic3R5bGUiOnsidGFpbCI6eyJuYW1lIjoiaG9vayIsInNpZGUiOiJ0b3AifSwiYm9keSI6eyJuYW1lIjoiZGFzaGVkIn19fV0sWzAsMiwiIiwwLHsic3R5bGUiOnsidGFpbCI6eyJuYW1lIjoiaG9vayIsInNpZGUiOiJ0b3AifX19XSxbMywxLCJcXHNpZ21hIiwyLHsic3R5bGUiOnsidGFpbCI6eyJuYW1lIjoiaG9vayIsInNpZGUiOiJ0b3AifX19XSxbMCwzLCIiLDIseyJsZXZlbCI6Miwic3R5bGUiOnsiaGVhZCI6eyJuYW1lIjoibm9uZSJ9fX1dXQ==)

:::

- Now use that the separable degree is multiplicative in towers.
- If all extensions in sight are **finite**, this direction is immediate:
\[
[L:k]_s = [L:K]_s [K:k]_s = [L:K][K:k] = [L:K]
.\]

- For the infinite case, want to show every $\alpha\in L$ is separable over $k$.
- Let $f(x) \da \min_{\alpha, K}(x)$ be the minimal polynomial of $\alpha$ *over the intermediate extension* $K$, which by assumption is separable since $L/K$ is separable.
  - So $f\in K[x]$, and letting $S$ be the finite set of coefficients of $f$, $S \subseteq K$.
  - Note that each coefficient $s\in S$ is separable over $k$ since $K/k$ is separable by assumption.
- Set $F\da K(\alpha, S) \intersect K$.
  Since $K/k$ is separable and $F \subseteq K$, $F/k$ is separable.
- Moreover $K(\alpha, S)/F$ is separable, since the minimal polynomial $\min_{\alpha, F} = f$ doesn't change.
- Now $K(\alpha, S) / K(S)/K$ is a tower of finite extensions where $K(\alpha, S)/K(S)$ and $K(S)/K$ are separable, so this reduces to the finite case.


:::




### Galois Extensions

:::{.definition title="Galois Extension and Galois Group"}
Let $L/k$ be a finite field extension.
The following are equivalent:

1. \( L/k \) is a **Galois extension**.
2. $L/k$ is normal and separable.
2. $\# \Aut_{\Fieldsover{k}} (L) = [L: k] = \ts{ L: k}$ (D&F's definition).
3. The fixed field of $\mathrm{Aut}(L/k)$ is exactly $k$.
4. $L$ is the splitting field of a separable polynomial $p\in K[x]$.
5. $L$ is finite, normal, and separable (most general definition?)
- $L$ is a finite separable splitting field of an irreducible polynomial.
- $L/k$ is separable and normal.
- The fixed field $L^H$ for $H \da \Aut_{\Fieldsover{k}}(L)$ is precisely $k$.

In this case, we define the **Galois group** as 
\[
\Gal(L/k) \definedas \Aut_{\Fieldsover{k}} (L)
.\]
:::

:::{.fact}
For $L/k$ algebraic and $\ch k = 0$, $L/k$ is Galois $\iff L/k$ is normal.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Galois is upper transitive, characterization of when lower transitivity holds"}
If $L/k$ is Galois, then $L/F$ is **always** Galois.
Moreover, $F/k$ is Galois if and only if \( \Gal(L/F) \normal \Gal(L/k) \)

\begin{tikzcd}
	{L} \\
	\\
	{F} \\
	\\
	{k}
	\arrow["{\text{Galois}}", from=1-1, to=5-1, curve={height=-18pt}, no head]
	\arrow["{\text{Galois}}", from=5-1, to=3-1, curve={height=-12pt}, squiggly, no head]
	\arrow["{\text{Galois}}"', from=1-1, to=3-1, curve={height=12pt}, dashed, no head]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsMyxbMCwwLCJMIl0sWzAsMiwiRiJdLFswLDQsImsiXSxbMCwyLCJcXHRleHR7R2Fsb2lzfSIsMCx7ImN1cnZlIjotMywic3R5bGUiOnsiaGVhZCI6eyJuYW1lIjoibm9uZSJ9fX1dLFsyLDEsIlxcdGV4dHtHYWxvaXN9IiwwLHsiY3VydmUiOi0yLCJzdHlsZSI6eyJib2R5Ijp7Im5hbWUiOiJzcXVpZ2dseSJ9LCJoZWFkIjp7Im5hbWUiOiJub25lIn19fV0sWzAsMSwiXFx0ZXh0e0dhbG9pc30iLDIseyJjdXJ2ZSI6Miwic3R5bGUiOnsiYm9keSI6eyJuYW1lIjoiZGFzaGVkIn0sImhlYWQiOnsibmFtZSI6Im5vbmUifX19XV0=)

In this case, 
\[
\Gal(F/k) \cong \frac{\Gal(L/k)}{\Gal(L/F)}
.\]

:::

:::{.proposition title="?"}
Let $L/K/k$ with $L/k$ Galois. Then
\[
K/k \text{ is Galois } \iff \Gal(L/K)\normal \Gal(L/k)
,\]
and moreover $\Gal(K/k) = G$.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
\envlist

- Note separability is distinguished, so $K/k$ is separable.
- $K/k$ is Galois $\iff$ $F/k$ is normal (since we already have separability).
- $\iff \sigma(K) = K$ for all $\sigma\in G$
- $\iff \sigma H \sigma\inv = H$ for all $\sigma \in G$.

So $H$ is normal and $G/H$ is a group.
For the isomorphism, take 
\[
\rho: \Gal(L/k) &\to \Gal(K/k) \\
\rho &\mapsto \ro{\rho}{K}
.\]
This is well-defined since by normality $\sigma(K) = K$.
Any $f\in \ker \rho$ is the identity on $K$, so $f\in \Gal(L/K)$ and $\ker \phi = H$.
Since $L/K$ is Galois, every $f\in \Gal(K/k)$ lifts to $\Gal(L/k)$, making $\rho$ surjective.

:::

:::{.example title="?"}
\envlist

- $\QQ(\zeta_3, 2^{1/3})$ is normal but $\QQ(2^{1/3})$ is not since the irreducible polynomial $x^3 - 2$ has only one root in it.
- $\QQ(2^{1/3})$ is not Galois since its automorphism group is too small (only of size 1 instead of 3?).
- $\QQ(2^{1/4})$ is not Galois since its automorphism group is too small (only of size 2 instead of 4).
  However, the intermediate extensions $\QQ(2^{1/4}) / \QQ(2^{1/2})$ and $\QQ(\sqrt 2) / \QQ$ are Galois since they are quadratic.
  Slogan: "Being Galois is not transitive in towers."
- A quadratic extension that is not Galois: $\SF(x^2 + y) \in \FF_2(y)[x]$, which factors as $(x - \sqrt{y})^2$, making the extension not separable.
:::




### Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory

:::{.theorem title="Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory"}
Let $L/k$ be a Galois extension, then there is a correspondence:
\[
\correspond{\text{Subgroups } H \leq \Gal(L/k)}
&\mapstofrom
\correspond{\text{Fields }  F \text{ such}\\ \text{that } L/F/k} \\
H &\rightarrow \correspond{E^H \definedas ~\text{The fixed field of $H$}} \\
\correspond{\Gal(L/F) \definedas \theset{ \sigma \in \Gal(L/k) \suchthat \sigma(F) = F}} &\leftarrow F
\]

- This is contravariant with respect to subgroups/subfields.

- $[F: k] = [G: H]$, so degrees of extensions over the base field correspond to indices of subgroups.

- $[K : F] = \abs{H}$

- $L/F$ is Galois and $Gal(K/F) = H$

- $F/k$ is Galois $\iff H$ is normal, and $\Gal(F/k) = \Gal(L/k)/H$.

- The compositum $F_1 F_2$ corresponds to $H_1 \intersect H_2$.

- The subfield $F_1 \intersect F_2$ corresponds to $H_1 H_2$.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Splitting + Perfect implies Galois"}
\envlist

- If $\ch k = 0$ or $k$ is finite, then $k$ is perfect.

- $k = \CC,\RR, \QQ, \FF_p$ are perfect, so any finite normal extension is Galois.

- Every splitting field of a polynomial over a perfect field is Galois.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Composite Extensions"}
If $F/k$ is finite and Galois and $L/k$ is arbitrary, then $FL/L$ is Galois and
\[
\Gal(FL/L) = \Gal(F / F\intersect L) \subset \Gal(F/k)
.\]
:::

### Special Extensions

:::{.theorem title="Finite Extensions are Algebraic"}
Every finite extension is algebraic.
:::

:::{.proof}
If \( K/F \) and \( [K:F] = n \), then pick any \( \alpha \in K \) and consider \( 1, \alpha , \alpha ^2, ...  \).
This yields \( n+1 \) elements in an \( n\dash \)dimensional vector space, and thus there is a linear dependence 
\[
f(\alpha ) \da \sum_{j=1}^n c_j \alpha ^j = 0
.\]
But then \( \alpha \) is the root of the polynomial \( f \).

:::

:::{.theorem title="Primitive Element Theorem"}
Every finite separable extension is simple.
:::

:::{.corollary}
$\GF(p^n)$ is a simple extension over $\FF_p$.
:::

### Quadratic Extensions

:::{.proposition title="Classification of quadratic extensions"}
If $\FF$ is a field with $\ch(\FF)\neq 2$ and $E_{/\FF}$ is a degree 2 extension, then $E$ is Galois and $E = F(\sqrt{a})$ for some squarefree $a\in \FF$.
:::

:::{.corollary title="Quadratic extensions of rationals"}
If $E_{/\QQ}$ is a quadratic extension, $E = \QQ(q)$ for some $q\in \QQ$.
:::

:::{.proposition title="?"}
For $\FF_p$ a finite field of prime order, all quadratic extensions $E/\FF_p$ are isomorphic.
:::

