# Galois Theory


:::{.proposition title="?"}
If $f\in k[x]$ is irreducible, then $\Gal(\SF(f)/k) \leq S_n$ is a transitive subgroup, i.e. it acts transitively on the set of roots.
:::

:::{.fact}
Transitive subgroups of $S_n$ for small $n$:

| $n \text{ in }S_n$ | Transitive Subgroups              |
|--------------|-----------------------------------|
| 1            | 1                                 |
| 2            | $\ZZ/2$                           |
| 3            | $S_3, \ZZ/3$                      |
| 4            | $S_4, A_4, D_4, (\ZZ/2)^2, \ZZ/4$ |
| 5            | $S_5, A_5, F_5, D_5, \ZZ/5$       |

- Nonabelian groups of order 8: $D_4, Q_8$.

:::



:::{.proposition}
If $L/k$ is algebraic, then $\Aut(L/k)$ permutes the roots of irreducible polynomials.
:::

:::{.proposition}
$\abs{\aut(L/k)} \leq [L: k]$ with equality precisely when $L/k$ is normal.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Towers are multiplicative in degree"}
Let $L/F/k$ be a finite tower of field extensions.
\[
[L : k] = [L: F][F: k]
.\]
:::


### Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory

:::{.theorem title="Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory"}
Let $L/k$ be a Galois extension, then there is a correspondence:
\[
\correspond{\text{Subgroups } H \leq \Gal(L/k)}
&\mapstofrom
\correspond{\text{Fields }  F \text{ such}\\ \text{that } L/F/k} \\
H &\rightarrow \correspond{E^H \definedas ~\text{The fixed field of $H$}} \\
\correspond{\Gal(L/F) \definedas \theset{ \sigma \in \Gal(L/k) \suchthat \sigma(F) = F}} &\leftarrow F
\]

- This is contravariant with respect to subgroups/subfields.

- $[F: k] = [G: H]$, so degrees of extensions over the base field correspond to indices of subgroups.

- $[K : F] = \abs{H}$

- $L/F$ is Galois and $Gal(K/F) = H$

- $F/k$ is Galois $\iff H$ is normal, and $\Gal(F/k) = \Gal(L/k)/H$.

- The compositum $F_1 F_2$ corresponds to $H_1 \intersect H_2$.

- The subfield $F_1 \intersect F_2$ corresponds to $H_1 H_2$.
:::



:::{.proposition title="?"}
Let $L/k$ be Galois and set $G\da \Gal(L/k)$ with $L/K/k$.
Then $K/k$ is Galois iff $H\da \Gal(L/K)$ is normal in $G$, and moreover $\Gal(K/k) = G$.
:::


:::{.proof title="?"}
\envlist

- Note separability is distinguished, so $K/k$ is separable.
- $K/k$ is Galois $\iff$ $F/k$ is normal (since we already have separability).
- $\iff \sigma(K) = K$ for all $\sigma\in G$
- $\iff \sigma H \sigma\inv = H$ for all $\sigma \in G$.

So $H$ is normal and $G/H$ is a group.
For the isomorphism, take 
\[
\rho: G \da \Gal(L/k) &\to H\to \Gal(K/k) \\
\rho &\mapsto \ro{\rho}{K}
.\]
This is well-defined since by normality $\sigma(K) = K$.
Any $f\in \ker \rho$ is the identity on $K$, so $f\in \Gal(L/K)$ and $\ker \phi = H$.
Since $L/K$ is Galois, every $f\in \Gal(K/k)$ lifts to $\Gal(L/k)$, making $\rho$ surjective.


:::



### Examples

:::{.example title="Cyclotomic Fields"}
$\Gal(\QQ(\zeta_n)/\QQ) \cong \ZZ/(n)\units$ and is generated by maps of the form $\zeta_n \mapsto \zeta_n^j$ where $(j, n) = 1$.
I.e., the following map is an isomorphism:
\[
\ZZ/(n)\units &\to \Gal(\QQ(\zeta_n), \QQ) \\
r \mod n &\mapsto (\phi_r: \zeta_n \mapsto \zeta_n^r )
\]
:::

:::{.example title="Finite Fields"}
$\Gal(\FF_{p^n}/\FF_p) \cong \ZZ/ \gens{ n }$, a cyclic group generated by powers of the Frobenius automorphism:
\[
\varphi_p: \FF_{p^n} \to \FF_{p^n} \\
x &\mapsto x^p
\]

> See D&F p.566 example 7.

:::


:::{.example title="Quadratic Fields"}
Every degree 2 extension $L/k$ is Galois, except possibly in characteristic 2: if \( \alpha\in L \sm k\) then \( \min_{\alpha}(x) \in L[x] \) must split in $L[x]$ since \( \alpha\in L \implies \min_{\alpha}(x) = (x- \alpha)g(x) \) which forces \( \deg(g) = 1 \).
So $L$ is a splitting field.
If $\ch(k) \neq 2$, then $\dd{}{x} \min_{ \alpha}(x) = 2x - \cdots \not\equiv 0$, making $L$ separable.
:::


:::{.proposition}
If $K$ is the splitting field of an irreducible polynomial of degree $n$, then $\Gal(K/\QQ) \leq S_n$ is a transitive subgroup.
:::

:::{.corollary}
$n$ divides the order $\abs{ \Gal(K/\QQ)}$.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Splitting + Perfect implies Galois"}
\hfill

- If $\ch k = 0$ or $k$ is finite, then $k$ is perfect.

- $k = \CC,\RR, \QQ, \FF_p$ are perfect, so any finite normal extension is Galois.

- Every splitting field of a polynomial over a perfect field is Galois.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Composite Extensions"}
If $F/k$ is finite and Galois and $L/k$ is arbitrary, then $FL/L$ is Galois and
\[
\Gal(FL/L) = \Gal(F / F\intersect L) \subset \Gal(F/k)
.\]
:::


### Counterexamples

:::{.example title="?"}
\envlist

- $\QQ(\zeta_3, 2^{1/3})$ is normal but $\QQ(2^{1/3})$ is not since the irreducible polynomial $x^3 - 2$ has only one root in it.
- $\QQ(2^{1/3})$ is not Galois since its automorphism group is too small (only of size 1 instead of 3?).
- $\QQ(2^{1/4})$ is not Galois since its automorphism group is too small (only of size 2 instead of 4).
  However, the intermediate extensions $\QQ(2^{1/4}) / \QQ(2^{1/2})$ and $\QQ(\sqrt 2) / \QQ$ are Galois since they are quadratic.
  Slogan: "Being Galois is not transitive in towers."
- A quadratic extension that is not Galois: $\SF(x^2 + y) \in \FF_2(y)[x]$, which factors as $(x - \sqrt{y})^2$, making the extension not separable.
:::n




