# Modules

## General Modules


:::{.definition title="Simple Module"}
A module is **simple** iff it has no nontrivial proper submodules.
:::


:::{.definition title="Free Module"}
A **free** module is a module satisfying the following universal property:

\todo[inline]{Todo: universal property.}

:::


:::{.proposition title="?"}
Every free \(R\dash\)module admits a basis (spanning $R\dash$linearly independent set).
:::


:::{.definition title="Torsionfree"}
A module \( M \) is **torsion-free** if and only if for every \( x\in M \), \( mx = 0_M \implies m=0_M \).
I.e. the only torsion element of \( M \) is zero itself.
:::


:::{.proposition title="Free implies torsionfree"}
For $R$ an integral domain, any free \(R\dash\)module $M$ is torsionfree.
:::

:::{.proof title=""}
Todo
:::

:::{.example title="of a module that is not free"}
$\ZZ/6$ is a $\ZZ\dash$module that is *not* free, since the element \( [3] \) is a torsion element, where \( 2[3] = [6] = [0] \).
:::

\todo[inline]{Example of torsionfree module that is not free.}



:::{.definition title="Projective Modules"}
A module $M$ is **projective** if and only if it satisfies the following universal property:

\todo[inline]{Universal property}

:::

:::{.proposition title="Projective iff direct summand of free"}
$P$ is a projective \(R\dash\)module if and only if $P$ is a direct summand of a free module.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Free implies projective"}
Any free $M\in \rmod$ is projective.
:::

:::{.example title="of a projective but not free module"}
Free implies projective, but not the converse.
Let \( R_1, R_2 \) be two nontrivial rings and set \( R \da R_1 \oplus R_2 \).
Then \( R_1, R_2 \) are projective \( R\dash \)modules by construction, but each factor contains \( R\dash \)torsion:
setting \( e \da (0, 1) \in R \) we have \( e \actson R_1 = 0_{R_1} \).
Since free implies torsionfree, \( R_1 \) can not be a free \(R\dash\)module.
:::


:::{.definition title="Exact Sequences"}
A sequence of \(R\dash\)module morphisms $0 \mapsvia{d_1} A \mapsvia{d_2} B \mapsvia{d_3} C \to 0$ is *exact* iff $\im d_i = \ker d_{i+1}$.
:::



:::{.proposition title="Splitting Exact Sequences"}
If $0 \to A \to B \to C \to 0$ is a short exact sequence, then

- $C$ free $\implies$ the sequence splits
- $C$ projective $\implies$ the sequence splits
- $A$ injective $\implies$ the sequence splits

Moreover, if this sequence splits, then $B \cong A \oplus C$.
:::


## Classification of Modules over a PID

Let $M$ be a finitely generated modules over a PID $R$.
Then there is an invariant factor decomposition

\begin{align*}
M \cong F \bigoplus R/(r_i) \quad\text{where } r_1 \divides r_2 \divides \cdots
\end{align*}

and similarly an elementary divisor decomposition.


:::{.proposition title="Principal Ideals are Free"}
$I \normal R$ is a free $R\dash$module iff $I$ is a principal ideal.
:::


:::{.proof title="?"}
$\implies$:

Suppose $I$ is free as an $R\dash$module, and let $B = \theset{\vector m_j}_{j\in J} \subseteq I$ be a basis so we can write $M = \generators{B}$.
Suppose that $\abs{B} \geq 2$, so we can pick at least 2 basis elements $\vector m_1\neq \vector m_2$, and consider
$$
\vector c = \vector m_1 \vector m_2 - \vector m_2 \vector m_1,
$$

which is also an element of $M$ .
Since $R$ is an integral domain, $R$ is commutative, and so
$$
\vector c = \vector m_1 \vector m_2 - \vector m_2 \vector m_1 = \vector m_1 \vector m_2 - \vector m_1 \vector m_2 = \vector 0_M
$$

However, this exhibits a linear dependence between $\vector m_1$ and $\vector m_2$, namely that there exist $\alpha_1, \alpha_2 \neq 0_R$ such that $\alpha_1 \vector m_1 + \alpha_2 \vector m_2 = \vector 0_M$; this follows because $M \subset R$ means that we can take $\alpha_1 = -m_2, \alpha_2 = m_1$. This contradicts the assumption that $B$ was a basis, so we must have $\abs{B} = 1$ and so $B = \theset{\vector m}$ for some $\vector m \in I$. But then $M = \generators{B} = \generators{\vector m}$ is generated by a single element, so $M$ is principal.

$\impliedby$:
Suppose $M\normal R$ is principal, so $M = \generators{\vector m}$ for some $\vector m \neq \vector{0}_M \in M \subset R$.

Then $x\in M \implies x = \alpha\vector m$ for some element $\alpha\in R$ and we just need to show that $\alpha\vector m = \vector 0_M \implies \alpha = 0_R$ in order for $\theset{\vector m}$ to be a basis for $M$, making $M$ a free $R\dash$module.
But since $M \subset R$, we have $\alpha, m \in R$ and $\vector 0_M = 0_R$, and since $R$ is an integral domain, we have $\alpha m = 0_R \implies \alpha = 0_R$ or $m = 0_R$.
Since $m \neq 0_R$, this forces $\alpha = 0_R$, which allows $\theset{m}$ to be a linearly independent set and thus a basis for $M$ as an $R\dash$module.

:::




