# UGA Fall 2019 Problem Sets


## Problem Set One

### Exercises

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 1.6.3"}
If $\sigma = (i_1 i_2 \cdots i_r) \in S_n$ and $\tau \in S_n$, then show
that $\tau\sigma\tau^{-1} = (\tau(i_1) \tau(i_2) \cdots \tau(i_r))$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 1.6.4"}
Show that$S_n \cong \left\langle (12), (123\cdots n)\right\rangle$ and also that
$S_n \cong \left\langle (12), (23\cdots n)\right\rangle$
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 2.2.1"}
Let $G$ be a finite abelian group that is not cyclic. Show that $G$ contains a subgroup isomorphic to
$\mathbb{Z}_p \oplus \mathbb{Z}_p$ for some prime $p$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 2.2.12.b.)"} 
Determine (up to isomorphism) all abelian groups of order 64; do the same for order 96.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 2.4.1"}
Let $G$ be a group and$A \trianglelefteq G$ be a normal abelian subgroup. Show that $G/A$ acts
on $A$ by conjugation and construct a homomorphism
$\varphi: G/A \to \mathrm{Aut}(A)$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 2.4.9)."} 
Let $Z(G)$ be the center of $G$. 
Show that if $G/Z(G)$ is cyclic, then $G$ is abelian.

> Note that Hungerford uses the notation $C(G)$ for the center.

:::


::: {.problem title="Hungerford 2.5.6"}
Let $G$ be a finite group and$H \trianglelefteq G$ a normal subgroup of order $p^k$. Show that $H$ is
contained in every Sylow $p$-subgroup of $G$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 2.5.9"}
Let $\left| G \right| = p^n q$ for some primes $p > q$. Show that $G$ contains a unique normal subgroup of
index $q$.
:::

### Qual Problems

::: {.problem}
Let $G$ be a finite group and $p$ a prime number. Let
$X_p$ be the set of Sylow-$p$ subgroups of $G$ and $n_p$ be the
cardinality of $X_p$. Let $\mathrm{Sym}(X)$ be the permutation group on
the set $X_p$.

1.  Construct a homomorphism $\rho: G \to \mathrm{Sym}(X_p)$ with image
    a transitive subgroup (i.e. with a single orbit).

2.  Deduce that if $G$ is simple then the order of $G$ divides $n_p!$.

3.  Show that for any $1\leq a \leq 4$ and any prime power $p^k$, no
    group of order $ap^k$ is simple.
:::

:::{#prob:1.10 .problem}
Let $G$ be a finite group and let $N \trianglelefteq G$,
and let $p$ be a prime number and $Q$ a subgroup of $G$ such that
$N \subset Q$ and $Q/N$ is a Sylow $p-$subgroup of $G/N$.

1.  Prove that $Q$ contains a Sylow $p-$subgroup of $G$.

2.  Prove that every Sylow $p-$subgroup of $G/N$ is the image of a Sylow
    $p-$subgroup of $G$.
:::

::: {#prob:1.11 .problem}
Let $G$ be a finite group and $H<G$ a subgroup. Let
$n_H$ be the number of subgroups of $G$ that are conjugate to $H$. Show
that $n_H$ divides the order of $G$.
:::

::: {#prob:1.12 .problem}
Let $G=S_5$, the symmetric group on 5 elements. Identify
all conjugacy classes of elements in $G$, provide a representative from
each class, and prove that this list is complete.
:::

## Problem Set Two

### Exercises

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 2.1.9"}
Let $G$ be a finitely generated abelian group in which no element (except 0) has finite order. Show that
$G$ is a free abelian group.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 2.1.10"}
\envlist

1.  Show that the additive group of rationals $\mathbb Q$ is not
    finitely generated.

2.  Show that $\mathbb Q$ is not free.

3.  Conclude that Exercise 9 is false if the hypothesis "finitely
    generated" is omitted.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 2.5.8"}
Show that if every Sylow $p-$subgroup of a finite group $G$ is normal for every prime $p$, then $G$ is the
direct product of its Sylow subgroups.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 2.6.4"}
What is the center of the quaternion group $Q_8$? Show that $Q_8/Z(Q_8)$ is abelian.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 2.6.9"}
Classify up to isomorphism all groups of order 18. Do the same for orders 20 and 30.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 1.9.1"}
Show that every non-identity element in a free group $F$ has infinite order.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 1.9.3"}
Let $F$ be a free group and for a fixed integer $n$, let $H_n$ be the subgroup generated by the set
$\{ x^n \mid x \in F \}$. Show that $H_n \trianglelefteq F$.
:::

### Qual Problems

::: {.problem}
List all groups of order 14 up to isomorphism.
:::

::: {.problem}
Let $G$ be a group of order $p^3$ for some prime $p$.
Show that either $G$ is abelian, or $\left| Z(G) \right| = p$.
:::

::: {#prob:2.10 .problem}
Let $p,q$ be distinct primes, and let $k$ denote the
smallest positive integer such that $p$ divides $q^k - 1$. Show that no
group of order $pq^k$ is simple.
:::

::: {#prob:2.11 .problem}
Show that $S_4$ is a solvable, nonabelian group.
:::

## Problem Set Three

### Exercises

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 2.7.10"}
Show that $S_n$ is solvable for$n\leq 4$ but $S_3$ and $S_4$ are not nilpotent.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 2.8.3"}
Show that if $N$ is a simple normal subgroup of a group $G$ and $G/N$ has a composition series, then $G$ has
a composition series.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 2.8.9"}
Show that any group of order $p^2 q$(for primes $p,q$) is solvable.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.1.1"}
Let $F/K$ be a field extension. 
Show that

1.  $[F: K] = 1$ iff $F = K$.

2.  If $[F: K]$ is prime, then there are no intermediate fields between
    $F$ and $K$.

3.  If $u\in F$ has degree $n$ over $K$, then $n$ divides $[F: K]$.

:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.1.8"}
Show that if $u\in F$ is algebraic of odd degree over $K$, then so is $u^2$, and moreover $K(u) = K(u^2)$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.1.14"}
\envlist


1.  If $F = \mathbb{Q}(\sqrt 2, \sqrt 3)$, compute $[F: \mathbb{Q}]$ and
    find a basis of $F/\mathbb{Q}$.

2.  Do the same for $\mathbb{Q}(i, \sqrt 3, \zeta_3)$ where $\zeta_3$ is
    a complex third root of 1.

:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.1.16"}
Show that in $\mathbb{C}$, the fields $\mathbb{Q}(i) \cong \mathbb{Q}(\sqrt 2)$ as vector spaces, but
not as fields. 
:::

### Qual Problems

::: {.problem}
Let $R$ and $S$ be commutative rings with multiplicative
identity.

1.  Prove that when $R$ is a field, every non-zero ring homomorphism
    $\phi: R\to S$ is injective.

2.  Does (a) still hold if we only assume that $R$ is a domain? If so,
    prove it, and if not provide a counterexample.
:::

::: {.problem}
Determine for which integers the ring
$\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$ is a direct sum of fields. Carefully prove your
answer.
:::

::: {.problem}
Suppose that $R$ is a commutative ring. Show that an
element $r\in R$ is not invertible iff it is contained in a maximal
ideal.
:::

::: {.problem}
\envlist


1.  Give the definition that a group $G$ must satisfy the be solvable.

2.  Show that every group $G$ of order 36 is solvable.

> Hint: You may assume that $S^4$ is solvable.

:::

## Problem Set Four

### Exercises

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.3.7"}
If $F$ is algebraically closed and$E$ is the set of all elements in $F$ that are algebraic over a field
$K$, then $E$ is an algebraic closure of $K$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.3.8"}
Show that no finite field is algebraically closed.

> Hint: if $K = \{a_i\}_{i=0}^n$, consider
\[ 
f(x) = a_1 + \prod_{i=0}^n (x - a_i) \in K[x]
\] 
  where $a_1 \neq 0$.

:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.5.2"}
Show that if $p\in\mathbb Z$ is prime, then $a^p = a$ for all $a\in\mathbb Z_p$, or equivalently
$c^p \equiv c \mod p$ for all $c\in\mathbb Z$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.5.3"}
Show that if $|K| = p^n$, then every element of $K$ has a unique $p$th root in $K$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.5.10"}
Show that every element in a finite field can be written as the sum of two squares.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.6.1"}
Let $F/K$ be a field extension. Let$\mathrm{char} K = p \neq 0$ and let $n\geq 1$ be an integer such that
$(p, n) = 1$. If $v\in F$ and $nv \in K$, then $v\in K$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.6.8"} If $\mathrm{char}
K = p \neq 0$ and$[F: K]$ is finite and not divisible by $p$, then $F$ is separable over
$K$.
:::

### Qual Problems

::: {.problem}
Suppose that $\alpha$ is a root in $\mathbb C$ of
$P(x) = x^{17} - 2$. How many field homomorphisms are there from
$\mathbb Q (\alpha)$ to:

1.  $\mathbb C$,

2.  $\mathbb R$,

3.  $\overline{\mathbb Q}$, the algebraic closure of $\mathbb Q$?
:::

::: {.problem}
Let $C/F$ be an algebraic field extension. Prove that
the following are equivalent:

1.  Every non-constant polynomial $f\in F[x]$ factors into linear
    factors over $C[x]$.

2.  For every (not necessarily finite) algebraic extension $E/F$, there
    is a ring homomorphism $\alpha: E \to C$ such that $\alpha \mid_F$
    is the identity on $F$.

> Hint: use Zorn's Lemma.

:::

::: {.problem}
Let $R$ be a commutative ring containing a field $k$,
and suppose that $\dim_k R < \infty$. Let $\alpha \in R$.

1.  Show that there exist $n\in \mathbb N$ and
    $\{ c_0, c_1, \cdots c_{n-1}\} \subseteq k$ such that
    $$a^n + c_{n-1}a^{n-1} + \cdots + c_1 a + c_0 = 0.$$

2.  Suppose that (a) holds and show that if $c_0 \neq 0$ then $a$ is a
    unit in $R$.

3.  Suppose that (a) holds and show that if $a$ is not a zero divisor in
    $R$, then $a$ is invertible.
:::

## Problem Set Five

### Exercises

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.3.5"}
Show that if $f\in K[x]$ has degree $n$ and $F$ is a splitting field of $f$ over $K$, the $[F: K]$ divides
$n!$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.3.12"}
Let $E$ be an intermediate field extension in $K \leq E \leq F$.

1.  Show that if $u\in F$ is separable over over $K$, then $u$ is
    separable over $E$.

2.  Show that if $F$ is separable over $K$, then $F$ is separable over
    $E$ and $E$ is separable over $K$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.3.13"}
Show that if $[F: K] < \infty$, then the following conditions are equivalent:

1.  $F$ is Galois over $K$

2.  $F$ is separable over $K$ and $F$ is a splitting field of some
    polynomial $f\in K[x]$.

3.  $F$ is a splitting field over $K$ of some polynomial $f\in K[x]$
    whose irreducible factors are separable.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.4.1"}
Suppose that $f\in K[x]$ splits in$F$ as $$f = \prod_{i=1}^k (x-u_i)^{n_i}$$ with the $u_i$ distinct and
each $n_i \geq 1$. Let
$$g(x) = \prod_{i=1}^k (x-u_i) = \sum_{i=1}^k v_i x^i$$

and let $E  = K(\{v_i\}_{i=1}^k)$. Then show that the following hold:

1.  $F$ is a splitting field of $g$ over $E$.

2.  $F$ is Galois over $E$.

3.  $\mathrm{Aut}_E(F) = \mathrm{Aut}_K(F)$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.4.10 a/g/h"}
Determine the Galois groups of the following polynomials over the corresponding fields:

1.  $x^4- 5$ over $\mathbb Q, \mathbb Q(\sqrt 5), \mathbb Q(i\sqrt 5)$.

2.  $x^3 - 2$ over $\mathbb Q$.

3.  $(x^3-2)(x^2-5)$ over $\mathbb Q$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.6.11"}
If $f \in K[x]$ is irreducible of degree $m > 0$ and $\mathrm{char}(K)$ does not divide $m$, then $f$ is
separable.
:::

### Qual Problems

::: {.problem}
Let $E/F$ be a Galois field extension, and let $K/F$ be
an intermediate field of $E/F$. Show that $K$ is normal over $F$ iff
$\mathrm{Gal}(E/K) \trianglelefteq \mathrm{Gal}(E/F)$.
:::

::: {.problem}
Let $F \subset L$ be fields such that $L/F$ is a Galois
field extension with Galois group equal to
$D_8 = \left< \sigma,\tau \mid \sigma^4 = \tau^2 = 1,~ \sigma\tau = \tau \sigma^3 \right>$.
Show that there are fields $F \subset E \subset K \subset L$ such that
$E/F$ and $K/E$ are Galois field extensions, but $K/F$ is not Galois.
:::

::: {.problem}
Let $f(x) = x^3 - 7$.

1.  Let $K$ be the splitting field for $f$ over $\mathbb Q$. Describe
    the Galois group of $K / \mathbb Q$ and the intermediate fields
    between $\mathbb Q$ and $K$. Which intermediate fields are not
    Galois over $\mathbb Q$?

2.  Let $L$ be the splitting field for $f$ over $\mathbb R$. What is the
    Galois group $L/ \mathbb R$?

3.  Let $M$ be the splitting field for $f$ over $\mathbb F_{13}$, the
    field with 13 elements. What is the Galois group of
    $M / \mathbb F_{13}$?
:::

## Problem Set Six

### Exercises

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.4.11"}
Determine all subgroups of the Galois group and all intermediate fields of the splitting (over
$\mathbb{Q}$) of the polynomial $(x^{3}-2)(x^{2}-3)\in \mathbb{Q}[x]$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.4.12"}
Let $K$ be a subfield of$\mathbb{R}$ and let $f \in K[x]$ be an irreducible quartic. If $f$ has
exactly 2 real roots, the Galois group of $f$ is either $S_{4}$ or
$D_{4}$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.8.3"}
Let $\phi$ be the Euler function.

1.  $\phi(n)$ is even for $n>2$.

2.  find all $n>0$ such that $\phi(n)=2$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.8.9"}
If $n>2$ and $\zeta$ is a primitive $n$th root of unity over $\mathbb{Q}$, then
$[\mathbb{Q}(\zeta + \zeta^{-1}): \mathbb{Q}]=\phi(n)/2.$
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.9.1"}
If $F$ is a radical extension field of $K$ and $E$ is an intermediate field, then $F$ is a radical extension
of $E$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 5.9.3"}
Let $K$ be a field, $f\in K[x]$ an irreducible polynomial of degree $n\geq 5$ and $F$ a splitting field of
$f$ over $K$. Assume that $Aut_{k}(F)\simeq S_{n}$. Let $u$ be a root of
$f$ in $F$. Then,

1.  $K(u)$ is not Galois over $K$; $[K(u):K]=n$ and $Aut_{K}(K(u))=1$
    (and hence solvable).

2.  Every normal closure over $K$ that contains $u$ also contains an
    isomorphic copy of $F$.

3.  There is no radical extension field $E$ of $K$ such that
    $K\subset K(u)\subset E$.
:::

### Qual Problems

::: {.problem}
\envlist

1.  Let $K$ be a field. State the main theorem of Galois theory for a
    finite field extension L/K

2.  Let $\zeta_{43} := e^{2\pi i /43}$. Describe the group of all field
    automorphisms
    $\sigma : \mathbb{Q} (\zeta_{43})\rightarrow \mathbb{Q} (\zeta_{43})$.

3.  How many proper subfields are there in the field
    $\mathbb{Q} (\zeta_{43})$?
:::

::: {.problem}
Let $F$ be a field and let $f(x)\in F[x]$.

1.  Define what is a splitting field of $f(x)$ over $F$.

2.  Let $F$ be a finite field with $q$ elements. Let $E/F$ be a finite
    extension of degree $n>0$. Exhibit an explicit polynomial
    $g(x)\in F[x]$ such that $E/F$ is a splitting of $g(x)$ over $F$.
    Fully justify your answer.

3.  Show that the extension $E/F$ in (2) is a Galois extension.
:::

::: {.problem}
Let $K \subset L \subset M$ be a tower of finite degree
field extensions. In each of the following parts, either prove the
assertion or give a counterexample (with justification).

1.  If $M/K$ is Galois, then $L/K$ is Galois

2.  If $M/K$ is Galois, then $M/L$ is Galois.
:::

## Problem Set Seven

### Exercises

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 4.1.3"}
Let $I$ be a left ideal of a ring$R$, and let $A$ be an $R-$module.

1.  Show that if $S$ is a nonempty subset of $A$, then
  \[
  IS \coloneqq \left\{ \sum_{i=1}^n r_i a_i \mid n\in \mathbb{N}^*; r_i \in I; a_i \in S \right\}
  \]
    is a submodule of $A$.

  > Note that if $S = \{a\}$, then $IS = Ia = \{ra \mid r\in I\}$.

2.  If $I$ is a two-sided ideal, then $A/IA$ is an $R/I$ module with the
    action of $R/I$ given by $$(r+I)(a+IA) = ra + IA.$$
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 4.1.5"}
If $R$ has an identity, then a nonzero unitary $R\dash$module is **simple** if its only submodules are $0$
and $A$.

1.  Show that every simple $R-$module is cyclic.

2.  If $A$ is simple, every $R-$module endomorphism is either the zero
    map or an isomorphism.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 4.1.7"}
\envlist


1.  Show that if $A,B$ are $R$-modules, then the set
    $\mathrm{Hom}_R(A, B)$ is all $R$-module homomorphisms $A \to B$ is
    an abelian group with $f+g$ given on $a\in A$ by
    $$(f+g)(a) \coloneqq f(a) + g(a) \in B.$$

    Also show that the identity element is the zero map.

2.  Show that $\mathrm{Hom}_R(A, A)$ is a ring with identity, where
    multiplication is given by composition of functions.

    *Note that $\mathrm{Hom}_R(A, A)$ is called the **endomorphism
    ring** of A.*

3.  Show that $A$ is a left $\mathrm{Hom}_R(A, A)$-module with an action
    defined by
    $$a\in A, f\in \mathrm{Hom}_R(A, A) \implies f \curvearrowright a \coloneqq f(a).$$
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 4.1.12"}
Let the following be a commutative diagram of $R$-modules and $R$-module homomorphisms with exact rows:

Prove the following:

1.  If $\alpha_1$ is an epimorphisms and $\alpha_2, \alpha_4$ are
    monomorphisms then $\alpha_3$ is a monomorphism.

2.  If $\alpha_5$ is a monomorphism and $\alpha_2, \alpha_4$ are
    epimorphisms then $\alpha_3$ is an epimorphism.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 4.2.4"}
Let $R$ be a principal ideal domain,$A$ a unitary left $R$-module, and $p\in R$ a prime (and thus
irreducible) element. Define $$\begin{aligned}
    pA &\coloneqq \{ pa \mid a\in A\} \\
    A[p] &\coloneqq \{ a\in A \mid pa = 0\}.\end{aligned}$$

Show the following:

1.  $R/(p)$ is a field.

2.  $pA$ and $A[p]$ are submodules of $A$.

3.  $A/pA$ is a vector space over $R/(p)$, with
    $$(r + (p))(a + pA) = ra + pA.$$

4.  $A[p]$ is a vector space over $R/(p)$ with $$(r + (p))a = ra.$$
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 4.2.8"}
If $V$ is a finite dimensional vector space and
$$V^m \coloneqq V \oplus V \oplus \cdots \oplus V \quad \text{($m$ summands)},$$
then for each $m\geq 1$, $V^m$ is finite dimensional and
$\dim V^m = m(\dim V)$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 4.2.9"}
If $F_1, F_2$ are free modules of a ring with the invariant dimension property, then
$$\mathrm{rank}(F_1 \oplus F_2) = \mathrm{rank} F_1 + \mathrm{rank} F_2.$$
:::

### Qual Problems

::: {.problem}
Let $F$ be a field and let $f(x) \in F[x]$.

1.  State the definition of a splitting field of $f(x)$ over $F$.

2.  Let $F$ be a finite field with $q$ elements. Let $E/F$ be a finite
    extension of degree $n>0$. Exhibit an explicit polynomial
    $g(x) \in F[x]$ such that $E/F$ is a splitting field of $g$ over
    $F$. Fully justify your answer.

3.  Show that the extension in $(b)$ is a Galois extension.
:::

::: {.problem}
Let $R$ be a commutative ring and let $M$ be an
$R$-module. Recall that for $\mu \in M$, the *annihilator* of $\mu$ is
the set $$\mathrm{Ann}(\mu) = \{ r\in R \mid r\mu = 0\}.$$

Suppose that $I$ is an ideal in $R$ which is maximal with respect to the
property there exists a nonzero element $\mu \in M$ such that
$I = \mathrm{Ann}(\mu)$.

Prove that $I$ is a *prime* ideal in $R$.
:::

::: {.problem}
Suppose that $R$ is a principal ideal domain and
$I \trianglelefteq R$ is an ideal. If $a\in I$ is an irreducible
element, show that $I = Ra$.
:::

## Problem Set Eight

### Exercises

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 4.4.1"}
Show the following:

1.  For any abelian group $A$ and any positive integer $m$,
  \[
  \mathrm{Hom}(\mathbb{Z}_m, A) \cong A[m] \coloneqq \{ a\in A \mid ma = 0\}
  .\]

2.  $\mathrm{Hom}(\mathbb{Z}_m, \mathbb{Z}_n) \cong \mathbb{Z}_{\mathrm{gcd}(m,n)}$.

3.  As a $\mathbb{Z}-$module, $\mathbb{Z}_m^* = 0$.

4.  For each $k\geq 1$, $\mathbb{Z}_m$ is a $\mathbb{Z}_{mk}-$module,
    and as a $\mathbb{Z}_{mk}$ module,
    $\mathbb{Z}_m^* \cong \mathbb{Z}_m$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 4.4.3"}
Let$\pi: \mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{Z}_2$ be the canonical epimorphism. Show
that the induced map
$\overline{\pi}: \mathrm{Hom}(\mathbb Z_2, \mathbb Z) \to \mathrm{Hom}(\mathbb Z_2, \mathbb Z_2)$
is the zero map. Conclude that $\overline{\pi}$ is not an epimorphism.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 4.4.5"}
Let $R$ be a unital ring, show that there is a ring homomorphism $\mathrm{Hom}_R(R, R) \to R^{op}$ where
$\mathrm{Hom}_R$ denotes left $R-$module homomorphisms. Conclude that if
$R$ is commutative, then there is a ring isomorphism
$\mathrm{Hom}_R(R, R) \cong R$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 4.4.9"}
Show that for any homomorphism$f: A \to B$ of left $R-$modules the following diagram is commutative:

where $\theta_A, \theta_B$ are as in Theorem 4.12 and $f^*$ is the map
induced on $A^{**} \coloneqq \mathrm{Hom}_R(\mathrm{Hom}(A, R), R)$ by
the map $$\overline f: \mathrm{Hom}(B, R) \to \mathrm{Hom}_R(A, R).$$
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 4.6.2"}
Show that every free module over a unital integral domain is torsion-free. Show that the converse is false.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 4.6.3"}
Let $A$ be a cyclic $R-$module of order $r \in R$.

1.  Show that if $s$ is relatively prime to $r$, then $sA = A$ and
    $A[s] = 0$.

2.  If $s$ divides $r$, so $sk = r$, then $sA \cong R/(k)$ and
    $A[s] \cong R/(s)$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 4.6.6"}
Let $A, B$ be cyclic modules over $R$of nonzero orders $r,s$ respectively, where $r$ is *not* relatively
prime to $s$. Show that the invariant factors of $A \oplus B$ are
$\mathrm{gcd}(r, s)$ and $\mathrm{lcm}(r, s)$.
:::

### Qual Problems

::: {.problem}
Let $R$ be a PID. Let $n > 0$ and $A \in M_n(R)$ be a
square $n\times n$ matrix with coefficients in $R$.

Consider the $R$-module $M \coloneqq R^n / \mathrm{im}(A)$.

1.  Give a necessary and sufficient condition for $M$ to be a torsion
    module (i.e. every nonzero element is torsion). Justify your answer.

2.  Let $F$ be a field and now let $R \coloneqq F[x]$. Give an example
    of an integer $n>0$ and an $n \times n$ square matrix $A \in M_n(R)$
    such that $M \coloneqq R^n/\mathrm{im}(A)$ is isomorphic as an
    $R-$module to $R \times F$.
:::

::: {.problem}
\envlist


1.  State the structure theorem for finitely generated modules over a
    PID.

2.  Find the decomposition of the $\mathbb{Z}-$module $M$ generated by
    $w,x,y,z$ satisfying the relations $$\begin{aligned}
            3w + 12y + 3x + 6z &=0 \\
            6y &= 0 \\
            -3w -3x + 6y &= 0.
        \end{aligned}$$
:::

::: {.problem}
Let $R$ be a commutative ring and $M$ an $R-$module.

1.  Define what a torsion element of $M$ is .

2.  Given an example of a ring $R$ and a cyclic $R-$module $M$ such that
    $M$ is infinite and $M$ contains a nontrivial torsion element $m$.
    Justify why $m$ is torsion.

3.  Show that if $R$ is a domain, then the subset of elements of $M$
    that are torsion is an $R-$submodule of $M$. Clearly show where the
    hypothesis that $R$ is a domain is used.
:::

## Problem Set Nine

### Exercises

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 7.1.3"}
\envlist


1.  Show that the center of the ring $M_n(R)$ consists of matrices of
    the form $rI_n$ where $r$ is in the center of $R$.

  > Hint: Every such matrix must commute with $\epsilon_{ij}$, the matrix with $1_R$ in the $i,j$ position and zeros elsewhere.

2.  Show that $Z(M_n(R)) \cong Z(R)$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 7.1.5"}
\envlist


1.  Show that if $A, B$ are (skew)-symmetric then $A+B$ is
    (skew)-symmetric.

2.  Let $R$ be commutative. Show that if $A,B$ are symmetric, then $AB$
    is symmetric $\iff AB=BA$. Also show that for any matrix
    $B \in M_n(R)$, both $BB^t$ and $B+B^t$ are always symmetric, and
    $B-B^t$ is always skew-symmetric.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 7.1.7"}
Show that similarity is an equivalence relation on $M_n(R)$, and \*equivalence\* is an equivalence
relation on $M_{m\times n}(R)$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 7.2.2"}
Show that an $n\times m$ matrix $A$over a division ring $D$ has an $m\times n$ left inverse $B$ (so
$BA = I_m$) $\iff \mathrm{rank} A = m$. Similarly, show $A$ has a right
$m\times n$ inverse $\iff \mathrm{rank} A = n$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 7.2.4"}
\envlist


1.  Show that a system of linear equations 
  \[
  a_{11} x_{1}+a_{12} x_{2} + &\cdots + a_{1 m} x_{m}=b_{1} \\ 
  & \vdots \\ 
  a_{n 1} x_{1}+a_{n 2} x_{2}+&\cdots+a_{n m} x_{m}=b_{n}
  \]
  has a simultaneous solution $\iff$ the corresponding matrix equation
  $AX = B$ has a solution, where
  $A = (a_{ij}), X = [x_1, \cdots, x_m]^t$, and
  $B = [b_1, \cdots , b_n]^t$.

2.  If $A_1, B_1$ are matrices obtained from $A, B$ respectively by
  performing the same sequence of elementary **row** operations, then
  $X$ is a solution of $AX=B$ $\iff$ $X$ is a solution of
  $A_1 X = B_1$.

3.  Let $C$ be the $n \times (m+1)$ matrix given by
\[
C = \left(\begin{array}{llll}{a_{11}} & {\cdots} & {a_{1 m}} & {b_{1}} \\ {} & {} & {} \\ {\cdot} & {} & {} \\ {a_{n 1}} & {\cdots} & {a_{n m}} & {b_{n}}\end{array}\right)
.\]
  Then $AX = B$ has a solution $\iff$
  $\mathrm{rank} A = \mathrm{rank} C$ and the solution is unique
  $\iff \mathrm{rank}(A) = m$.

  >Hint: use part 2.

4.  If $B=0$, so the system $AX=B$ is homogeneous, then it has a
    nontrivial solution $\iff \mathrm{rank} A < m$ and in particular
    $n<m$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 7.2.5"}
Let $R$ be a PID. For each positive integer $r$ and sequence of nonzero ideals
$I_1 \supset I_2 \supset \cdots \supset I_r$, choose a sequence
$d_i \in R$ such that $(d_i) = I_i$ and $d_i \mid d_{i+1}$.

For a given pair of positive integers $n, m$, let $S$ be the set of all
$n\times m$ matrices of the form
$\left(\begin{array}{ll}{L_{r}} & {0} \\ {0} & {0}\end{array}\right)$
where $r=1,2,\cdots,\min(m,n)$ and $L_r$ is a diagonal $r\times r$
matrix with main diagonal $d_i$.

Show that $S$ is a set of canonical forms under equivalence for the set
of all $n\times m$ matrices over $R$.
:::

### Qual Problems

::: {.problem}
Let $R$ be a commutative ring.

1.  Say what it means for $R$ to be a unique factorization domain (UFD).

2.  Say what it means for $R$ to be a principal ideal domain (PID)

3.  Give an example of a UFD that is not a PID. Prove that it is not a
    PID.
:::

::: {.problem}
Let $A$ be an $n\times n$ matrix over a field $F$ such
that $A$ is diagonalizable. Prove that the following are equivalent:

1.  There is a vector $v\in F^n$ such that $v, Av, \cdots A^{n-1}v$ is a
    basis for $F^n$.

2.  The eigenvalues of $A$ are distinct.
:::

::: {.problem}
Let $x,y \in \mathbb{C}$ and consider the matrix

$$M =
\left[\begin{array}{ccc}
     1 & 0 & x \\
     0 & 1 & 0 \\
     y & 0 & 1
\end{array}\right]$$

1.  Show that $[0, 1, 0]^t$ is an eigenvector of $M$.

2.  Compute the rank of $M$ as a function of $x$ and $y$.

3.  Find all values of $x$ and $y$ for which $M$ is diagonalizable.
:::

## Problem Set Ten

### Exercises

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 7.3.1"}
Let $B$ be an $R$-module. Show that if $r+r\neq 0$ for all $r\neq 0 \in R$, then an $n$-linear form
$B^n\to R$ is alternating $\iff$ it is skew-symmetric.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 7.3.5"}
If $R$ is a field and $A, B \in M_n(R)$ are invertible then the matrix $A + rB$ is invertible
for all but a finite number of $r\in R$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 7.4.4"}
Show that if $q$ is the minimal polynomial of a linear transformation $\phi: E\to E$ with $\dim_k E = n$
then $\deg q \leq n$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 7.4.8)."} 
Show that $A\in M_n(K)$ is similar to a diagonal matrix $\iff$ the elementary divisors of $A$ are all linear.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 7.4.10"}
Find all possible rational canonical forms for a matrix $A\in M_n(\Bbb Q)$ such that

1.  $A$ is $6\times 6$ with minimal polynomial $q(x) = (x-2)^2(x+3)$.

2.  $A$ is $7\times 7$ with $q(x) = (x^2+1)(x-7)$.

Also find all such forms when $A \in M_n(\Bbb C)$ instead, and find all
possible Jordan Canonical Forms over $\Bbb C$.
:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 7.5.2"}
Show that if $\phi$ is an endomorphism of a free $k$-module $E$ of finite rank, then
$p_\phi(\phi) = 0$.

**Hint**:
If $A$ is the matrix of $\phi$ and $B = x I_n - A$ then 
\[
B^a B = |B| I_n = p_\phi I_n \in M_n(k[x])
.\]
If $E$ is a $k[x]$-module with structure induced by $\phi$, and $\psi$ is the $k[x]$-module endomorphism $E\to E$ with matrix given by $B$, then 
\[ 
\psi(u) = x u -\phi(u) = \phi(u) - \phi(u) = 0
\]
for all $u\in E$.

:::

::: {.problem title="Hungerford 7.5.7"}
\envlist

1.  Let $\phi,\psi$ be endomorphisms of a finite-dimensional vector
    space $E$ such that $\phi\psi = \psi \phi$. Show that if $E$ has a
    basis of eigenvectors of $\psi$, then it has a basis of eigenvectors
    for both $\psi$ and $\phi$ simultaneously.

2.  Interpret the previous part as a statement about matrices similar to
    a diagonal matrix.
:::

### Qual Problems

::: {.problem}
Let $M \in M_5(R)$ be a $5\times 5$ square matrix with
real coefficients defining a linear map $L: \Bbb{R}^5 \to \Bbb R^5$.
Assume that when considered as an element of $M_5(\Bbb C)$, then the
scalars $0, 1+i, 1+2i$ are eigenvalues of $M$.

1.  Show that the associated linear map $L$ is neither injective nor
    surjective.

2.  Compute the characteristic polynomial and minimal polynomial of $M$.

3.  How many fixed points can $L$ have?

    *(That is, how many solutions are there to the equation $L(v) = v$
    with $v\in \Bbb R^5$?)*
:::

::: {.problem}
Let $n$ be a positive integer and let $B$ denote the
$n\times n$ matrix over $\Bbb C$ such that every entry is 1. Find the
Jordan normal form of $B$.
:::

::: {.problem}
Suppose that $V$ is a 6-dimensional vector space and
that $T$ is a linear transformation on $V$ such that $T^6 = 0$ and
$T^5\neq 0$.

1.  Find a matrix for $T$ in Jordan Canonical form.

2.  Show that if $S, T$ are linear transformations on a 6-dimensional
    vector space $V$ which both satisfy $T^6=S^6=0$ and $T^5,S^5\neq 0$,
    then there exists a linear transformation $A$ from $V$ to itself
    such that $ATA^{-1} = S$.
:::
