#  Fall 2018

## 1

Concepts used:

- Uniform continuity.

Show a stronger statement: $f(x) = \frac 1 x$ is uniformly continuous on any interval of the form $(c, \infty)$ where $c > 0$.

- Note that
$$
\abs{x}, \abs y > c > 0 \implies \abs{xy} = \abs{x}\abs{y} > c^2 \implies \frac{1}{\abs{xy}} < \frac 1 {c^{2}}
.$$

- Letting $\varepsilon$ be arbitrary, choose $\delta < \varepsilon c^2$.
 - Note that $\delta$ does not depend on $x, y$.
- Then
\begin{align*}
\abs{f(x) - f(y)}
&= \abs{\frac 1 x - \frac 1 y} \\
&= \frac{\abs{x-y}}{xy} \\
&\leq \frac{\delta}{xy} \\
&< \frac{\delta}{c^2} \\
&< \varepsilon
,\end{align*}
  which shows uniform continuity.

To see that $f$ is not uniformly continuous when $c=0$:

> Note: negating uniform continuity says $\exists \eps > 0$ such that $\forall \delta(\eps)$ there exist $x, y$ such that $\abs{x-y} < \delta$ *and* $\abs{f(x) - f(y)} > \eps$.

- Let $\varepsilon < 1$.
- Let $x_n = \frac 1 n$ for $n\geq 1$.
- Choose $n$ large enough such that $\abs{x_n - x_{n+1}} = \frac 1 n - \frac 1 {n+1} < \delta$.
  - Why this can be done: by the archimedean property of $\RR$, choose $n$ such that ${1\over n} < \eps$.
  - Then
  \begin{align*}
  {1 \over n} - {1\over n+1} = {1 \over n(n+1)} \leq {1\over n} < \eps \quad\text{since }n+1 > 1
  .\end{align*}
- Note $f(x_n) = n$ and thus $$\abs{f(x_n) - f(x_{n+1})} = n - (n+1) = 1 > \varepsilon.$$

$\qed$

## 2

Concepts used:

- Definition of measurability: there exists an open $O\supset E$ such that $m_*(O\setminus E) < \eps$ for all $\eps> 0$.
- Theorem: $E$ is Lebesgue measurable iff there exists a closed set $F\subseteq E$ such that $m_*(E\setminus F) < \eps$ for all $\eps>0$.
- Every $F_\sigma, G_\delta$ is Borel.
- Claim: $E$ is measurable $\iff$ for every $\varepsilon$ there exist $F_\varepsilon \subset E \subset G_\varepsilon$ with $F_\varepsilon$ closed and $G_\varepsilon$ open and $m(G_\varepsilon \setminus E)< \varepsilon$ and $m(E\setminus F_\varepsilon) < \varepsilon$.
  - Proof: existence of $G_\eps$ is the definition of measurability.
  - Existence of $F_\eps$: ?

- Claim: $E$ is measurable $\implies$ there exists an open $O\supseteq E$ such that $m(O\setminus E) = 0$.
  - Since $E$ is measurable, for each $n\in \NN$ choose $G_n \supseteq E$ such that $m_*(G_n\setminus E) < {1\over n}$.
  - Set $O_N \definedas \intersect_{n=1}^N G_n$ and $O\definedas \intersect_{n=1}^\infty G_n$.
  - Suppose $E$ is bounded.
    - Note $O_N \searrow O$ and $m_*(O_1) < \infty$ if $E$ is bounded, since in this case
    \begin{align*}
    m_*(G_n\setminus E) = m_*(G_1) - m_*(E) < 1 \iff m_*(G_1) < m_*(E) + {1\over n} < \infty
    .\end{align*}
    - Note $O_N \setminus E \searrow O \setminus E$ since $O_N\setminus E \definedas O_N \intersect E^c \supseteq O_{N+1} \intersect E^c$ for all $N$, and again $m_*(O_1 \setminus E) < \infty$.
    - So it's valid to apply continuity of measure from above:
\begin{align*}
m_*(O\setminus E) 
&= \lim_{N\to\infty} m_*(O_N\setminus E) \\ 
&\leq \lim_{N\to \infty} m_*(G_N\setminus E) \\ 
&= \lim_{N\to\infty} {1\over N} = 0
,\end{align*}
      where the inequality uses subadditivity on $\intersect_{n=1}^N G_n \subseteq G_N$
  - Suppose $E$ is unbounded.
    - Write $E^k = E \intersect [k, k+1]^d \subset \RR^d$ as the intersection of $E$ with an annulus, and note that $E = \disjoint_{k\in \NN} E_k$.
    - Each $E_k$ is bounded, so apply the previous case to obtain $O_k \supseteq E_k$ with $m(O_k\setminus E_k) = 0$.
    - So write $O_k = E_k \disjoint N_k$ where $N_k \definedas O_k \setminus E_k$ is a null set.
    - Define $O = \union_{k\in \NN} O_k$, note that $E\subseteq O$.
    - Now note
\begin{align*}
O\setminus E 
&= \qty{\disjoint_k O_k}\setminus \qty{\disjoint_K E_k} \\
&\subseteq \disjoint_k \qty{O_k \setminus E_k} \\
\implies m_*(O\setminus E) 
&\leq m_*\qty{\disjoint \qty{O_k \setminus E_k} } = 0
,\end{align*}
  since any countable union of null sets is again null.
  - So $O\supseteq E$ with $m(O\setminus E) = 0$.
- Theorem: since $E$ is measurable, $E^c$ is measurable
  - Proof: It suffices to write $E^c$ as the union of two measurable sets, $E^c = S \union (E^c - S)$, where $S$ is to be determined.
  - We'll produce an $S$ such that $m_*(E^c - S) = 0$ and use the fact that any subset of a null set is measurable.
  - Since $E$ is measurable, for every $\eps > 0$ there exists an open $\OO_\eps \supseteq E$ such that $m_*(\OO_\eps \setminus E) < \eps$.
  - Take the sequence $\theset{\eps_n \definedas {1\over n}}$ to produce a sequence of sets $\OO_n$.
  - Note that each $\OO_n^c$ is closed and 
  \begin{align*}
  \OO_n \supseteq E \iff \OO_n^c \subseteq E^c
  .\end{align*}
  - Set $S \definedas \union_n \OO_n^c$, which is a union of closed sets, thus an $F_\sigma$ set, thus Borel, thus measurable.
  - Note that $S\subseteq E^c$ since each $\OO_n \subseteq E^c$.
  - Note that
  \begin{align*}
  E^c\setminus S 
  &\definedas E^c \setminus \qty{\union_{n=1}^\infty \OO_n^c} \\
&\definedas E^c \intersect \qty{\union_{n=1}^\infty \OO_n^c}^c  \quad\text{definition of set minus} \\ 
  &= E^c \intersect \qty{\intersect_{n=1}^\infty \OO_n}^c  \quad \text{De Morgan's law}\\
  &= E^c \union \qty{\intersect_{n=1}^\infty \OO_n}  \\
  &\definedas \qty{ \intersect_{n=1}^\infty \OO_n} \setminus E \\
  & \subseteq \OO_N \setminus E \quad \text{for every } N\in \NN
  .\end{align*}
  - Then by subadditivity,
    $$
    m_*(E^c\setminus S) \leq m_*(\OO_N \setminus E) \leq {1\over N} \quad \forall N \implies m_*(E^c\setminus S) = 0
    .$$
  - Thus $E^c\setminus S$ is measurable.
  
### Indirect Proof

- Since $E$ is measurable, $E^c$ is measurable.
- Since $E^c$ is measurable exists an open $O\supseteq E^c$ such that $m(O\setminus E^c) = 0$.
- Set $B \definedas O^c$, then $O\supseteq E^c \iff \OO^c \subseteq E \iff B\subseteq E$.
- Computing measures yields 
\begin{align*}
E\setminus B \definedas E\setminus  \OO^c \definedas E\intersect (\OO^c)^c = E\intersect \OO = \OO \intersect(E^c)^c \definedas \OO \setminus E^c
,\end{align*}
  thus $m(E\setminus B) = m(\OO\setminus E^c) = 0$.
- Since $\OO$ is open, $B$ is closed and thus Borel.


### Direct Proof

? \todo{Try to construct the set.}


## 3

Concepts used:

-  Mean Value Theorem
- DCT

\begin{align*}
\dd{}{t} F(t) 
&= \dd{}{t} \int_\RR f(x) \cos(xt) ~dx \\
&\overset{DCT}= \int_\RR f(x) \dd{}{t} \cos(xt) ~dx \\
&= \int_\RR xf(x) \cos(xt)~dx
,\end{align*}
so it only remains to justify the DCT.

- Fix $t$, then let $t_n \to t$ be arbitrary.
- Define 
$$
h_n(x, t) = f(x)
\left(\frac{\cos(tx) - \cos(t_n x)}{t_n - t}\right) \converges{n\to\infty}\to \dd{}{t} \qty{f(x) \cos(xt)}
$$
 since $\cos(tx)$ is differentiable in $t$ and this is the limit definition of differentiability.

- Note that
\begin{align*}
\dd{}{t} \cos(tx) 
&\definedas \lim_{t_n \to t} \frac{\cos(tx) - \cos(t_n x)}{t_n - t} \\
&\overset{MVT} = \dd{}{t}\cos(tx)\mid_{t  = \xi_n} \hspace{6em} \text{for some } \xi_n \in [t, t_n] \text{ or } [t_n, t] \\
&= x\sin(\xi_n x)
\end{align*}
  where $\xi_n \converges{n\to\infty}\to t$ since wlog $t_n \leq \xi_n \leq t$ and $t_n \nearrow t$.

- We then have $$\abs{h_n(x)} = \abs{f(x) x\sin(\xi_n x)} \leq \abs{xf(x)}\quad\text{since} \abs{\sin(\xi_n x)} \leq  1$$ for every $x$ and every $n$.
- Since $xf(x) \in L^1(\RR)$ by assumption, the DCT can be applied.

## 4

> ???

Apparently "easy" part: let $f(x) = \chi_{[0, \pi]}$, then $\int_\RR f(x) \abs{\sin(nx)} = \int_0^\pi \abs{\sin(nx)} = 2$, and so $\int_0^1 \abs{\sin(nx)} = \frac 2 \pi$, none of which depend on $n$.

Now approximate $f$ by step functions.

## 5

> ???
